research highlight
cell research (2006)16: 855-856
© 2006 ibcb, sibs, cas    all rights reserved 1001-0602/06  $ 30.00 
www.nature.com/cr
npg
855
npg
selective degradation of the ikb kinase (ikk) by autophagy
dangsheng li1
1cell research, shanghai institutes for biological sciences, chinese academy of sciences, 319 yueyang road, shanghai 200031, 
china 
    cell research (2006) 16:855-856. doi:10.1038/sj.cr.7310110; published online 16 november 2006
proteasome-mediated degradation and autophagy are the two major pathways mediating the turnover of cellular 
proteins. the proteasomal pathway is known to be a highly specific and regulated process mediating the degradation 
of short-lived proteins such as many important factors involved in cellular signaling. in contrast, it is generally thought 
that autophagy is rather nonselective as it is responsible for the bulk degradation of long-lived proteins and organelles. 
challenging this general view, in this issue of cell research, qing et al. report that selective degradation of the ikb 
kinase (ikk) triggered by the loss of hsp90 function is mediated by autophagy [1].
ikk phosphorylates ikb, marking it for subsequent proteasomal degradation. it is thus a critical regulator of the nf-
kb pathway, which holds prominent roles in inflammation and cancer. hsp90 is a well-known molecular chaperone that 
functions to assist the proper folding of many client proteins. inhibition of hsp90 function often leads to degradation 
of its clients presumably as a result of their improper folding; and degradation of these clients has all been known to 
be mediated by the proteasomal pathway until the study by qing et al [1]. led by the recent finding that ikk is a cli-
ent of hsp90 [2], the authors started by examining the protein levels of all three ikk subunits in a number of cell lines 
treated with geldanamycin (ga), a specific inhibitor of hsp90. perhaps not surprisingly, they found that in all cases, 
ga treatment induced a significant reduction in ikk protein levels. additional experiments indicated that reduced ikk 
expression is due to enhanced degradation. while all these results seemed to be expected, a surprise emerged when the 
authors further investigated the underlying mechanism and found that ikk degradation induced by ga did not appear 
to involve the proteasomal pathway. this was supported by two main pieces of evidence. first, the authors employed a 
mutant cell line harboring a temperature-sensitive mutation in the e1 ubiquitin-activating enzyme that is critical for the 
ubiquitination reaction. shifting these cells to a higher temperature inactivates the e1 and abolishes ubiquitination; and 
the authors found that under such conditions known substrates of the ubiquitin/proteasomal pathway were stabilized. in 
contrast, inactivation of e1 did not affect ga-induced degradation of ikk. second, the proteasome inhibitor mg132 
also failed to block ga-induced ikk degradation.
to shed more light on the mechanism of ikk degradation triggered by the loss of hsp90 function, qing et al. probed 
the potential role of autophagy as it is the other main system for protein turnovers in cells. they “interfered” with cellular 
autophagy by treating cells with a chemical inhibitor of autophagy or by using cells that genetically lack an essential 
component of the autophagy machinery; and interestingly, they found in both cases ga-induced degradation of ikk 
was significantly inhibited. as an important control, the authors showed that interfering with autophagy had no effect on 
ga-induced degradation of akt, another client of hsp90 that is known to be degraded by the proteasomal pathway upon 
inhibition of hsp90 function. taken together, the results by qing et al. clearly indicate that the selective degradation of 
ikk in the absence of hsp90 function is mediated by the autophagy pathway, revealing a novel link between hsp90 and 
autophagy. the study by qing et al. also suggests that under certain circumstances cells can employ the autophagy path-
way to achieve specific degradation of a signaling molecule, and raises tantalizing questions regarding the mechanism(s) 
by which the autophagy pathway/machinery selects its target substrate (in this case, ikk). given that the hsp90 inhibi-
tor ga is an anti-tumor agent and given the prominent role of the nf-kb pathway in cancer and inflammation, further 
understanding of the underlying mechanism(s) may also have therapeutic implications.
www.cell-research.com | cell research
856
references
1 qing 0, yan p, xmo g. hquo mmbmon results in aulophagy-medialed proteasome-independent degradation oflkb kinase (ikk). cell
res 2006;16:895-901.
2 chen g, cao 12, goeddel dv. tnf-induced recruilmenl and activation ofth lkk complex require cum and hsp90. mol cell 2002;
1401.410,
ce” research \ www.ceh-research cam