leukemia (2006) 20, 1937–1942
& 2006 nature publishing group all rights reserved 0887-6924/06 $30.00
www.nature.com/leu
review
megakaryocytic dysfunction in myelodysplastic syndromes and idiopathic
thrombocytopenic purpura is in part due to different forms of cell death
ej houwerzijl1, nr blom1,2, jjl van der want2, e vellenga1 and jtm de wolf1
1department of hematology, university medical center groningen, groningen, the netherlands and 2department of cell
biology and electron microscopy, university medical center groningen, groningen, the netherlands
platelet production requires compartmentalized caspase acti-
vation within megakaryocytes. this eventually results in
platelet release in conjunction with apoptosis of the remaining
megakaryocyte. recent studies have indicated that in low-risk
myelodysplastic syndromes (mds) and idiopathic thrombocy-
topenic purpura (itp), premature cell death of megakaryocytes
may contribute to thrombocytopenia. different cell death
patterns have been identiﬁed in megakaryocytes in these
disorders. growing evidence suggests that, besides apoptosis,
necrosis and autophagic cell death, may also be programmed.
therefore, programmed cell death (pcd) can be classiﬁed in
apoptosis, a caspase-dependent process, apoptosis-like, auto-
phagic and necrosis-like pcd, which are predominantly cas-
pase-independent processes. in mds, megakaryocytes show
features of necrosis-like pcd, whereas itp megakaryocytes
demonstrate predominantly characteristics of apoptosis-like
pcd (para-apoptosis). triggers for these death pathways are
largely unknown.
in mds, the interaction of fas/fas-ligand
might be of importance, whereas in itp antiplatelet autoanti-
bodies recognizing common antigens on megakaryocytes and
platelets might be involved. these ﬁndings illustrate that
cellular death pathways in megakaryocytes are recruited in
both physiological and pathological settings, and that different
forms of cell death can occur in the same cell depending on the
stimulus and the cellular context. elucidation of the underlying
mechanisms might lead to novel therapeutic interventions.
leukemia (2006) 20, 1937–1942. doi:10.1038/sj.leu.2404385;
published online 7 september 2006
keywords: apoptosis; programmed cell death; megakaryocytes;
platelets; itp; mds
introduction
megakaryocytes arise from pluripotent hematopoietic stem cells
that undergo lineage commitment, proliferation and differentia-
tion under the inﬂuence of cytokines, in particular thrombo-
poietin (tpo). as a result of endomitosis, megakaryocytes
become polyploid cells with a large cytoplasmic mass. this
enables each megakaryocyte to produce 1000–3000 platelets.
the exact mechanism of platelet production remains unclear.
current evidence supports the mechanism initially suggested by
wright
from cytoplasmic
pseudopodial extensions (proplatelets). these proplatelets are
created from an abundant cytoplasmic reservoir of membranes
(demarcation membrane system).1 after the release of platelets,
the remaining senescent megakaryocyte, consisting of a nucleus
and a thin margin of cytoplasm (denuded megakaryocyte),
that platelets bud off
in 1906,
undergoes apoptosis, a common form of programmed cell death
(pcd).2,3 however, the apoptotic program is also required for
proplatelet
formation and the release of mature platelets.
activation of caspase-3 and -9 has been demonstrated not only
in senescent megakaryocytes but also in maturing and proplate-
let-bearing megakaryocytes.4 in contrast to senescent megakaryo-
cytes, no dna fragmentation could be detected in maturing
megakaryocytes, suggesting that caspase activation is compart-
mentalized. consistent with these ﬁndings,
the cytoplasmic
distribution of activated caspase-3 showed a granular pattern in
maturing megakaryocytes, whereas in senescent megakaryo-
cytes a diffuse cytoplasmic staining pattern was observed. thus,
after proplatelet formation caspase activation switches from a
circumscript to a diffuse form, thereby inducing apoptosis in
senescent megakaryocytes. this notion is supported by observa-
tions of diminished proplatelet formation by caspase inhibitors
and overexpression of antiapoptotic protein bcl-2.4
thus, in normal physiology platelet production and mega-
karyocyte apoptosis are closely related events.
in diseases,
however, premature pcd might disrupt platelet formation. this
has been demonstrated in myelodysplastic syndromes (mds)
and idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (itp). this review
discusses the role of pcd in these disorders and summarizes
some recent developments concerning pcd.
programmed cell death
speciﬁc genes,
pcd is deﬁned as an active, controlled, process of sequential, in
principle reversible, events leading to cell death. pcd requires
the activity of
is not associated with an
inﬂammatory response and plays a major role in both normal
development and disease. these characteristics distinguish pcd
from accidental necrosis. apoptosis is often used as a synonym of
pcd. however, certain forms of necrosis and autophagic cell
death are also programmed events.5–8 therefore, pcd can be
subdivided into apoptosis (type i), autophagic cell death (type ii)
and necrosis-like pcd (type iii).6,8 this classiﬁcation is primarily
based on morphology. however, many other techniques to assess
cell death exist. most of these methods are not sensitive and
speciﬁc enough to diagnose cell death independently. therefore,
it is advised to use multiple techniques simultaneously.9,10 a
summary of frequently used techniques is given in table 1.9,10
correspondence: dr ej houwerzijl, department of hematology,
university medical center groningen, hanzeplein 1, po box
30001, 9700 rb groningen, the netherlands.
e-mail: e.j.houwerzijl@int.umcg.nl
received 17 february 2006; revised 24 july 2006; accepted 4 august
2006; published online 7 september 2006
apoptosis (type i pcd)
apoptosis
is morphologically characterized by chromatin
condensation, nuclear fragmentation, cell surface blebbing, cell
shrinkage and the formation of apoptotic bodies. the induction
of classic apoptosis involves the sequential activation of initiator
and effector caspases, which are proteolytic enzymes that
megakaryocytic cell death in mds and itp
ej houwerzijl et al
1938
table 1
a selection of methods of cell death detection applicable to tissue sections9,10
methods
type of cell death
stage of cell death
comments
morphology
electron microscopy
apoptosis
autophagic cell death
necrosis
late
autophagosome
late
gold standard, but morphology alone is insensitive
gold standard (two-membraned vacuoles)
gold standard, not distinguishable from necrosis-like pcd
histochemistry
tunel/isel
apoptosis
intermediate and late
caspases
apoptosis
intermediate and late
lc-3
autophagic cell death
autophagosome
pretreatment that deteriorates dna can reduce sensitivity
false-positivity may occur in: necrosis, cells in process
of dna repair, pretreatment that induces dna breaks
helpful in diagnosing apoptosis when used in combination
with morphology
applicable to archival material
helpful in diagnosing apoptosis when used in combination
with morphology
correlates well with morphology and tunel
applicable to archival material
correlates well with morphology of autophagosomes
abbreviations: isel, in situ end labeling; lc-3, light chain-3; pcd, programmed cell death; tunel, tdt-mediated dutp-biotin nick end labeling.
figure 1 schematic model of pathways leading to cell death. predominantly mitochondrial pathways are depicted. classical apoptosis can be
triggered by the extrinsic (a) and intrinsic (mitochondrial) pathway (b). both pathways can be triggered by death receptor-mediated caspase-8
activity. numerous other stress responses converge on the mitochondria and can promote the onset of mpt. mpt can subsequently lead to momp.
depending on multiple factors, such as the speed of mpt, the number of mitochondria involved and the availability of adenosine triphosphate
(atp), either apoptosis, necrosis or autophagy occurs. the green ovals represent a reﬁnement of the traditional classiﬁcation of cell death.7
abbreviations: aif, apoptosis inducing factor; cd, cell death; endog, endonuclease g; mpt, mitochondrial permeability transition; momp,
mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization; ros, reactive oxygen species.
degrade essential cellular targets. caspase-3, the main effector
caspase, can be activated by an extrinsic pathway involving
cellular death receptors, and an intrinsic (mitochondrial) path-
way involving cytochrome c, apaf-1 and caspase 9. the
mitochondrial pathway can also induce caspase-independent
apoptosis (also called apoptosis-like pcd) (figure 1).7
autophagic cell death (type ii pcd)
type ii pcd can develop from autophagy (self eating),
characterized by sequestration of cellular organelles in dou-
ble-membraned vacuoles (autophagosomes), which fuse with
lysosomes leading to degradation of their content. however,
frequently autophagy, at least initially, functions as a protective
mechanism for cell destruction. in situations of starvation, the
cells maintains atp production by reducing the amount of
cytoplasm and organelles into autophagosomes.11 autophagic
cell death has predominantly been observed when the apoptotic
pathway is blocked, suggesting that cells die preferentially by
apoptosis and that apoptosis is a faster process than autophagic
cell death.12
necrosis-like pcd (type iii cell death)
necrosis is an unregulated process, characterized by rapid cell
and organelle swelling, loss of plasma membrane integrity, atp
depletion,
ion deregulation and activation of degradative
leukemia
enzymes. however, regulated forms of necrotic cell death
(called necrosis-like pcd or programmed necrosis) have also
been observed, especially under conditions (i.e. viral infections)
in which apoptosis is inhibited.5–8
cross-talk between types of cell death and mitochondria
between the different
types of cell death, ﬂexibility exists
making it possible that apoptosis can switch to necrosis and
autophagy depending on the cellular context. several studies
have shown that the inhibition of the apoptotic machinery can
trigger a switch from apoptosis to necrosis6,8 or autophagy.11 in
these processes, mitochondrial dysfunction plays an important
role.7 mitochondria can integrate cell death signals and
represent a nexus at which different pathways interact.12 crucial
events at the mitochondrial level are: opening of mitochondrial
permeability transition (mpt) pores in the inner mitochondrial
membrane, loss of the mitochondrial transmembrane potential
and mitochondrial
permeabilization
(momp)7,8,13 (figure 1). the intensity of the stimulus leading
to mpt and the cellular context determines which type of cell
death develops.7,8
outer membrane
pcd in mds
to result
apoptosis in mds: evidence and controversies
mds are a heterogeneous group of clonal hematopoietic stem
cell disorders, characterized by a dysplastic and ineffective
hematopoiesis. the alterations in the hematopoietic cells are
thought
from irreversible dna damage within a
hematopoietic stem cell and an accumulation of multiple
genetic lesions during hematopoiesis. the precise pathogenesis
of mds is not elucidated, but numerous studies (reviewed by
parker and mufti;14 liesveld et al.;15 yoshida and mufti16)
indicate that enhanced intramedullary apoptosis may be an
important disease mechanism, especially in explaining the
paradox between bone marrow hypercellularity and peripheral
cytopenias, in particular in low-risk mds. however, studies on
apoptosis have also been conﬂicting and disagreement regard-
ing the degree and extent of apoptosis,
the involvement
of stromal cells and the clinical implications of apoptosis in
mds bone marrow, remain. the evidence and controversies
regarding apoptosis in mds have been reviewed extensively
elsewhere.15–17
etiology of thrombocytopenia in low-risk mds and pcd
of mds megakaryocytes
thrombocytopenia occurs in 30–50% of patients with mds and
may result in serious bleeding complications. isolated thrombo-
cytopenia is the presenting manifestation in 5–10% of mds
patients, and may then be mistaken for itp.18
increased platelet destruction? up to 50% of patients have
a decreased platelet lifespan, suggesting that increased periph-
eral platelet destruction mediated by (non-)immune mechan-
isms might contribute to thrombocytopenia in mds.19 findings
that several immunomodulatory agents and splenectomy lead to
an increase in platelet counts in some mds patients may support
this notion.20,21
decreased platelet production. however,
thrombocyto-
penia in mds is mainly caused by ineffective platelet
production resulting from impaired proliferation and differentia-
1939
megakaryocytic cell death in mds and itp
ej houwerzijl et al
tion of megakaryocytes and their precursors.15 morphological
studies of mds bone marrow have shown increased numbers of
abnormal megakaryocytes, in particular micromegakaryocytes
with a low peak ploidy number (4–8n), suggesting an expansion
of megakaryocytic precursors, an arrest in terminal megakaryo-
cyte differentiation and impaired nuclear development. other
dysplastic features include large mononuclear forms, multiple
separate nuclei, dissociation between cytoplasmic and nuclear
maturation and megakaryocytic hypogranulation.22 although
not all megakaryocytes in mds appear abnormal on light
microscopy, cytogenetic studies show that
the majority of
megakaryocytes are involved in the mds clone, even when
micromegakaryocytes are not analyzed.23
several studies have shown a defective in vitro megakaryo-
cytopoiesis in mds.
in many mds cases, megakaryocyte
progenitor growth was unresponsive to recombinant tpo.22,24
this defective response is probably due to deregulated tpo-
receptor-mediated signaling pathways,25 as a lack of serum
tpo,26 a decreased expression of c-mpl (tpo-receptor)22 or
mutations in c-mpl25 have been excluded.
pcd in mds megakaryocytes.
studies on apoptosis in
mds megakaryocytes are scarce compared to erythroid and
myeloid precursors. this is in part due to the low number of
megakaryocytes and their vulnerability during bone marrow
sample processing. elevated numbers of denuded megakaryo-
cytes in bone marrow biopsies from mds patients have been
reported27 and have been ascribed to apoptosis on the basis of
earlier reports concerning the ultrastructure of senescent murine
megakaryocytes.2 the observations in mds, however, were
solely based on light microscopy.27 several studies using
electron microscopy,28–30 tdt-mediated dutp-biotin nick end
labeling (tunel) or in situ end labeling (isel)29,31 have reported
apoptosis in megakaryocytes. other authors,32,33 however,
reported that they could not identify apoptosis in megakaryo-
cytes, perhaps as a result of bone marrow sample preparation
techniques or owing to a lineage-restricted propensity for
apoptosis. similarly, a recent study34 using isel demonstrated
apoptosis in only 4% of megakaryocytes, which were pre-
dominantly micromegakaryocytes. these ﬁndings are largely
consistent with results from our own study,19 in which mds
megakaryocytes were negative for activated caspase-3 and
showed no ultrastructural features of apoptosis. the megakaryo-
cytes demonstrated ultrastructural changes resembling necrosis-
like cell death, including clumping and random degradation of
nuclear chromatin and cytoplasmic vacuoles (figure 2c and
table 2). how these megakaryocytic changes arise,
is not
clear. preliminary results suggest a role for the fas/fas-ligand
system.
(fasl)
of mds
megakaryocytes
necrosis-like morphology was
positive for fas and fasl (blom et al., unpublished observations,
2005).
the fas/fasl
system might play an important role in inducing intramedullary
apoptosis in mds.35 apart from inducing apoptosis, stimulation
(i.e.
of fas and other death receptors
tumor necrosis
caspase-independent
can also trigger
factor-receptor 1)
pcd.36 crucial
pathways
leading
to
necrosis-like
in
fas-mediated signaling to either apoptotic or necrosis-like
pcd is
the fas-associated death domain (fadd). when
caspases are inhibited, signaling via fadd leads to necrosis-
like pcd. alternatively, fadd-induced necrotic pcd can be
reverted to apoptosis by degradation of receptor-interacting
protein 1.36 thus, as it is the cellular context that determines
whether stimulation of fas triggers apoptotic or necrosis-like
immunohistochemical
showing
staining
increased death signals,
in particular
leukemia
1940
megakaryocytic cell death in mds and itp
ej houwerzijl et al
figure 2 the ultrastructure of megakaryocytes. itp megakaryocyte showing features of apoptosis (a;  5000) and apoptosis-like cell death (para-
apoptosis) (b;  7000). (c) a megakaryocyte from a patient with mds (refractory anemia), demonstrating characteristics of necrosis-like cell death.
an apoptotic neutrophilic granulocyte is visible in the upper part of the image ( 5000).
table 2
characteristics of megakaryocytic alterations in itp and mds
itp
mds
ultrastructure
nuclear changes
cytoplasmic changes
dna fragmentation
tunel/isel
caspase activity
immunohistochemistry
possible stimuli
possible inhibitors
nucleus in periphery of cell
chromatin condensation:
some mks: crescent-shaped (apoptosis)
majority of mks: without margination
(compatible with para-apoptosis)19
vacuoles, swelling of endoplasmic
reticulum, mitochondria with disrupted cristae
and distended dms; enlarged peripheral
zone (para-apoptosis)19
nucleus centrally in the mk
non-condensed chromatin, partly lying in spherical
speckles/small clumps;
no nucleoli; smooth non-lobulated outlines43
cytoplasmic vacuoles; mitochondrial disruption
reduced numbers of granules, disordered dms43
normal in children with acute and chronic itp
(bone marrow aspirates)48
conﬂicting results (see text)
megakaryocytes with apoptotic morphology
were caspase-3 positive19
factors in itp plasma induce abnormalities
compatible with pcd19
prednisolon, ivig19
caspase-3: conﬂicting results: negative43/positive50
caspase-8: minority (o10%) positive19
fas/fas-l?a
unknown
abbreviations: dms, demarcation membrane system; fas-l, fas-ligand; isel, in situ endlabeling; itp, idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura; ivig,
intravenous immunoglobulins; mds, myelodysplastic syndromes; mk, megakaryocyte; pcd, programmed cell death; tunel, tdt-mediated
dutp-biotin nick end labeling.
ablom et al., unpublished results.
pcd, increased fas/fasl expression in bone marrow cells of
mds patients might also be related to the presence of necrosis-
like pcd. a similar switch in pcd might occur dependent on in
vivo or in vitro conditions. caspase-independent cell death
might occur primarily in bone marrow megakaryocytes, but may
switch to apoptosis when the cells are taken from their
microenvironment. although some in vitro studies suggest that
mds stromal cells induce apoptosis in hematopoietic cells,14 in
vivo it may be possible that prosurvival signals provided by the
microenvironment inhibit the apoptotic pathway. these signals
might, in concert with the intrinsic cellular defects in signaling
pathways,37 make the mds megakaryocytes vulnerable for
necrosis-like pcd. when the remaining prosurvival signals
disappear owing to the detachment of megakaryocytes from the
microenvironment, the cells might become programmed to the
apoptotic route.
in summary, the mechanisms underlying defective megakar-
yocytopoiesis in mds are not completely elucidated. pcd of
mature megakaryocytes probably contributes to thrombocyto-
penia; however, apoptosis may play a secondary role.
pcd of megakaryocytes in itp
is platelet production impaired in itp?
in classical itp, platelet’s lifespan is greatly reduced owing to
accelerated immune-mediated peripheral platelet destruction,
predominantly in the spleen. as a result, platelet production is
considered to be compensatory increased, reﬂected by an
elevated number of megakaryocytes in the bone marrow
and by an increased platelet
turnover determined with
radiolabeled platelet studies.38 however, many observations
have questioned this traditional view on itp. early morpho-
logical studies revealed that
the number of megakaryocytes
in itp patients is often normal instead of increased, and that an
increased number of megakaryocytes does not always
imply increased platelet production.39 most megakaryocytes
in these observations were morphologically altered and
surrounded by a greatly diminished number of platelets. in
addition, platelet kinetic studies have identiﬁed large sub-
groups of
itp patients with a decreased or normal platelet
turnover.40,41
leukemia
morphological alterations of megakaryocytes
morphological changes in itp megakaryocytes, such as exten-
sive cytoplasmic vacuolization, hypogranularity and smoothing
of
the cell membrane, were already described by frank
in 1915, and later conﬁrmed by others.39 it was argued that
these alterations were artifacts induced by ﬁxation and/or
staining methods. similar abnormalities, however, were found
using phase-contrast microscopy, by which cells can be
examined in the living and unstained state.42 ultrastructurally,
a majority of itp megakaryocytes show alterations,43 including
cytoplasmic vacuoles owing to swelling of mitochondria and
endoplasmic reticulum and chromatin condensation. this
morphology resembles features of pcd,
including apoptosis
(conﬁrmed by detection of caspase-3 activity) and para-
apoptosis, a form of active caspase-3-negative,43 tunel-44
and isel-45 negative apoptosis-like pcd (figure 2a–b and
table 2). para-apoptotic megakaryocytes have also been
described in idiopathic myeloﬁbrosis45 and gata-1low mice.44
in these mice, blocked megakaryocyte maturation results in an
accumulation of defective megakaryocytes showing increased
neutrophil emperipolesis. subsequent release of neutrophilic
proteases in the megakaryocyte cytoplasm might induce para-
apoptosis.44
an alternative explanation for
the extensive cytoplasmic
vacuoles in itp megakaryocytes might be autophagy. consider-
ing a state of compensatory increased megakaryocytopoiesis
and therefore a state of
increased metabolic demand and
relative nutrient deﬁciency, autophagy might be a mechanism
for generating enough energy to maintain cell metabolism.
alternatively, autophagy might be a way of sequestering and
degrading speciﬁc pathogens, such as immunoglobulins in the
case of itp. in this situation, autophagy may end in type ii pcd
or perhaps apoptosis, when autophagy has reached its limits.
the observed cytoplasmic vacuoles in megakaryocytes of itp
patients, however, appear of non-lysosomal origin. they are
mainly not double membraned, mostly empty and appear to
originate predominantly from dilated organelles.
megakaryocytic cell death in mds and itp
ej houwerzijl et al
concluding remarks
1941
for
in the last decade,
the knowledge on pcd has expanded
substantially. the classical division of cell death in apoptosis,
which is often used as a synonym of pcd, and necrosis has
evolved to a broad spectrum of pcd in which both apoptosis,
necrosis-like pcd, autophagic cell death and mixed forms have
their place. pcd is an essential element of normal and
pathological cell physiology. this also accounts
the
megakaryocytopoiesis. like many cells, megakaryocytes possess
several pathways that lead to cell death. in normal physiological
conditions, elements of the apoptotic system are required for the
formation of platelets;
in diseases, such as mds and itp,
inappropriate, apoptotic and non-apoptotic, pcd of megakaryo-
cytes occurs. in itp, megakaryocytes are intrinsically normal
cells and pcd is induced by external factors. mds megakar-
yocytes undergo increased pcd probably as a consequence of
extensive intrinsic defects and a perturbed response to (possible
aberrant) extrinsic factors from the bone marrow microenviron-
ment. future research has to focus on the exact
triggers,
mechanisms and clinical implications of pcd in these disorders,
in order to generate more insight into the pathophysiology of
thrombocytopenia in itp and mds and to develop new
treatment strategies, especially for patients with refractory
disease and symptomatic thrombocytopenia. although blocking
caspases often stops the apoptotic process, pcd is frequently not
prevented and other, caspase-independent, forms of cell death
develop instead. as mitochondrial dysfunction (especially
momp)
represents the ‘point of no return’ of cell death,
preventing mitochondrial dysfunction or common regulatory
mechanisms upstream of mitochondrial dysfunction might be
promising for novel therapeutic interventions. although a major
problem in developing these strategies is drug speciﬁcity, so that
interventions do not inﬂuence normal cell physiology, numer-
ous strategies of
target death
receptors and their ligands, p53, stress kinases and proteases,
and momp, are currently investigated and in some instances
already available for clinical use.13
inhibition of cell death that
the etiology of the megakaryocyte alterations in itp
some have ascribed these megakaryocytic changes to increased
compensatory megakaryocytopoiesis, as similar abnormalities
have been described in megakaryocytes from animals made
thrombocytopenic by thrombocytopheresis.46 increased thrombo-
cytopenia-induced thrombopoiesis should theoretically lead to
elevated numbers of denuded megakaryocytes.3 to our knowl-
this has not been reported in itp bone marrow.47,48
edge,
the damaged megakaryocytes found in itp43
furthermore,
show no ultrastructural resemblance to these denuded mega-
karyocytes.
there is evidence that
factors in itp plasma, possibly
antiplatelet autoantibodies, are responsible for the megakaryo-
cyte alterations in itp. morphological alterations resembling
those found in itp megakaryocytes could be induced in
megakaryocytes from healthy persons within 2 h after intra-
venous injections of plasma from itp patients.42 we found
corresponding results with electron microscopy in megakaryo-
cytes cultivated in the presence of itp plasma.43 it has been
shown that antiplatelet autoantibodies can recognize antigens
on megakaryocytes and can suppress the in vitro production
and maturation of megakaryocytes,49 suggesting that platelet
production in many itp patient is suppressed.
acknowledgements
this work was supported by a grant
foundation and the dutch cancer society (2003–2920).
from the jk de cock
references
1 patel sr, hartwig jh, italiano jr je. the biogenesis of platelets from
megakaryocyte proplatelets. j clin invest 2005; 115: 3348–3354.
2 radley jm, haller cj. fate of senescent megakaryocytes in the
bone marrow. br j haematol 1983; 53: 277–287.
3 zauli g, vitale m, falcieri e, gibellini d, bassini a, celeghini c
et al. in vitro senescence and apoptotic cell death of human
megakaryocytes. blood 1997; 90: 2234–2243.
4 de botton s, sabri s, daugas e, zermati y, guidotti je, hermine o
et al. platelet formation is the consequence of caspase activation
within megakaryocytes. blood 2002; 100: 1310–1317.
5 edinger al, thompson cb. death by design: apoptosis, necrosis
and autophagy. curr opin cell biol 2004; 16: 663–669.
6 kitanaka c, kuchino y. caspase-independent programmed
cell death with necrotic morphology. cell death differ 1999; 6:
508–515.
7 leist m, ja¨a¨ttela¨ m. four deaths and a funeral: from caspases to
alternative mechanisms. nat rev mol cell biol 2001; 2: 589–598.
8 assunc¸a˜o guimara˜es c, linden r. programmed cell deaths.
apoptosis and alternative deathstyles. eur j biochem 2004; 271:
1638–1650.
leukemia
megakaryocytic cell death in mds and itp
ej houwerzijl et al
9 otsuki y, li z, shibata ma. apoptotic detection methods – from
morphology to gene. prog histochem cytochem 2003; 38:
275–339.
10 kroemer g, el-deiry ws, golstein p, peter me, vaux d,
vandenabeele p et al. nomenclature committee on cell death.
classiﬁcation of cell death: recommendations of the nomenclature
committee on cell death. cell death differ 2005; 12: 1463–1467.
11 kroemer g, ja¨a¨ttela¨ m. lysosomes and autophagy in cell death
control. nat rev cancer 2005; 5: 886–897.
12 levine b, yuan j. autophagy in cell death: an innocent convict?
j clin invest 2005; 115: 2679–2688.
13 green dr, kroemer g. pharmacological manipulation of
cell death: clinical applications in sight? j clin invest 2005; 115:
2610–2617.
14 parker je, mufti gj. the myelodysplastic syndromes: a matter of
life or death. acta haematol 2004; 111: 78–99.
15 liesveld jl, jordan ct, phillips ii gl. the hematopoietic stem cell
in myelodysplasia. stem cells 2004; 22: 590–599.
16 yoshida y, mufti gj. apoptosis and its signiﬁcance in mds:
controversies revisited. leuk res 1999; 23: 777–785.
17 mundle sd. lingering biologic dilemmas about
the status of
the progenitor cells in myelodysplasia. arch med res 2003; 34:
515–519.
18 steensma dp, bennett
jm. the myelodysplastic syndromes:
diagnosis and treatment. mayo clin proc 2006; 81: 104–130.
jw et al.
19 houwerzijl ej, blom nr, van der want jj, louwes h, esselink mt,
smit
increased peripheral platelet destruction and
caspase-3-independent programmed cell death of bone marrow
megakaryocytes in myelodysplastic patients. blood 2005; 105:
3472–3479.
20 cines db, cassileth pa, kiss je. danazol therapy in myelodys-
plasia. ann intern med 1985; 103: 58–60.
21 bourgeois e, caulier mt, rose c, dupriez b, bauters f, fenaux p.
role of splenectomy in the treatment of myelodysplastic syn-
dromes with peripheral thrombocytopenia: a report on six cases.
leukemia 2001; 15: 950–953.
22 hofmann wk, kalina u, koschmieder s, seipelt g, hoelzer d,
ottmann og. defective megakaryocytic development in myelo-
dysplastic syndromes. leuk lymphoma 2000; 38: 13–19.
23 van lom k, houtsmuller ab, van putten wl, slater rm,
lo¨wenberg b. cytogenetic clonality analysis of megakaryocytes
in myelodysplastic syndrome by dual-color ﬂuorescence in situ
hybridization and confocal
laser scanning microscopy. genes
chromosomes cancer 1999; 25: 332–338.
24 adams ja, liu yin ja, brereton ml, briggs m, burgess r, hyde k.
the in vitro effect of pegylated recombinant human megakaryo-
cyte growth and development
(peg rhumgdf) on
megakaryopoiesis in normal subjects and patients with myelo-
dysplasia and acute myeloid leukaemia. br j haematol 1997; 99:
139–146.
factor
25 kalina u, hofmann wk, koschmieder s, wagner s, kauschat d,
hoelzer d et al. alteration of c-mpl-mediated signal transduction
in cd34(+) cells from patients with myelodysplastic syndromes.
exp hematol 2000; 28: 1158–1163.
26 zwierzina h, rollinger-holzinger i, nuessler v, herold m, meng
yg. endogenous serum thrombopoietin concentrations in patients
with myelodysplastic syndromes. leukemia 1998; 12: 59–64.
27 hatﬁll sj, fester ed, steytler
jg. apoptotic megakaryocyte
dysplasia in the myelodysplastic syndromes. hematol pathol
1992; 6: 87–93.
28 bogdanovic ad, trpinac dp, jankovic gm, bumbasirevic vz,
obradovic m, colovic md. incidence and role of apoptosis in
myelodysplastic syndrome: morphological and ultrastructural
assessment. leukemia 1997; 11: 656–659.
29 shetty v, hussaini s, broady-robinson l, allampallam k, mundle
s, borok r et al. intramedullary apoptosis of hematopoietic cells in
myelodysplastic syndrome patients can be massive: apoptotic cells
recovered from high-density fraction of bone marrow aspirates.
blood 2000; 96: 1388–1392.
30 shetty v, hussaini s, alvi s, joshi l, shaher a, dangerﬁeld b et al.
excessive apoptosis,
increased phagocytosis, nuclear inclusion
bodies and cylindrical confronting cisternae in bone marrow
biopsies of myelodysplastic syndrome patients. br j haematol
2002; 116: 817–825.
31 kurotaki h, tsushima y, nagai k, yagihashi s. apoptosis, bcl-2
expression and p53 accumulation in myelodysplastic syndrome,
myelodysplastic-syndrome-derived acute myelogenous leukemia
and de novo acute myelogenous leukemia. acta haematol 2000;
102: 115–123.
32 bouscary d, de vos j, guesnu m, jondeau k, viguier f, melle j
et al. fas/apo-1 (cd95) expression and apoptosis in patients with
myelodysplastic syndromes. leukemia 1997; 11: 839–845.
33 brada sj, van de loosdrecht aa, koudstaal j, de wolf jt, vellenga
e. limited numbers of apoptotic cells in fresh parafﬁn embedded
bone marrow samples of patients with myelodysplastic syndrome.
leuk res 2004; 28: 921–925.
34 li x, pu q. megakaryocytopoiesis and apoptosis in patients with
myelodysplastic syndromes. leuk lymphoma 2005; 46: 387–391.
35 kitagawa m, yamaguchi s, takahashi m, tanizawa t, hirokawa k,
kamiyama r. localization of fas and fas ligand in bone marrow
cells demonstrating myelodysplasia. leukemia 1998; 12: 486–492.
36 vanden berghe t, van loo g, saelens x, van gurp m, brouckaert
g, kalai m et al. differential signaling to apoptotic and necrotic
cell death by fas-associated death domain protein fadd. j biol
chem 2004; 279: 7925–7933.
37 fuhler gm, drayer al, vellenga e. decreased phosphorylation of
protein kinase b and extracellular signal-regulated kinase in
neutrophils from patients with myelodysplasia. blood 2003; 101:
1172–1180.
38 harker la. thrombokinetics in idiopathic thrombocytopenic
purpura. br j haematol 1970; 19: 95–104.
39 diggs lw, hewlett jb. a study of the bone marrow from thirty-six
patients with idiopathic hemorrhagic (thrombopenic) purpura.
blood 1948; 3: 1090–1104.
40 ballem pj, segal gm, stratton jr, gernsheimer t, adamson jw,
slichter sj. mechanisms of thrombocytopenia in chronic auto-
immune thrombocytopenic purpura. evidence of both impaired
platelet production and increased platelet clearance. j clin invest
1987; 80: 33–40.
41 louwes h, zeinali lathori oa, vellenga e, de wolf jt. platelet
kinetic studies in patients with idiopathic thrombocytopenic
purpura. am j med 1999; 106: 430–434.
42 pisciotta av, stefanini m, dameshek w. studies on platelets. x.
morphologic characteristics of megakaryocytes by phase contrast
microscopy in normals and in patients with idiopathic thrombo-
cytopenic purpura. blood 1953; 8: 703–723.
43 houwerzijl ej, blom nr, van der want jj, esselink mt, koornstra
jj, smit jw et al. ultrastructural study shows morphologic features
of apoptosis and para-apoptosis in megakaryocytes from patients
with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura. blood 2004; 103:
500–506.
44 centurione l, di baldassarre a, zingariello m, bosco d, gatta v,
rana ra et al.
increased and pathologic emperipolesis of
neutrophils within megakaryocytes associated with marrow
ﬁbrosis in gata-1(low) mice. blood 2004; 104: 3573–3580.
45 thiele j, lorenzen j, manich b, kvasnicka hm, zirbes tk,
in idiopathic
fischer r. apoptosis (programmed cell death)
(primary) osteo-/myeloﬁbrosis: naked nuclei in megakaryopoiesis
reveal
features of para-apoptosis. acta haematol 1997; 97:
137–143.
46 craddock jr cg, adams ws, perry s, lawrence js. the dynamics
of platelet production as studied by a depletion technique in
normal and irradiated dogs. j lab clin med 1955; 45: 906–919.
47 zucker-franklin d, termin cs, cooper mc. structural changes in
the megakaryocytes of patients infected with the human immune
deﬁciency virus (hiv-1). am j pathol 1989; 134: 1295–1303.
48 ucar c, oren h, irken g, ates h, atabay b, turker m et al.
investigation of megakaryocyte apoptosis in children with acute
and chronic idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura. eur j haematol
2003; 70: 347–352.
49 mcmillan r, wang l, tomer a, nichol j, pistillo j. suppression
of in vitro megakaryocyte production by antiplatelet autoanti-
bodies from adult patients with chronic itp. blood 2004; 103:
1364–1369.
50 ohshima k, karube k, shimazaki k, kamma h, suzumiya j,
hamasaki m et al. imbalance between apoptosis and telomerase
activity in myelodysplastic syndromes: possible role in ineffective
hemopoiesis. leuk lymphoma 2003; 44: 1339–1346.
1942
leukemia