carcinogenesis vol.28 no.5 pp.1021–1031, 2007
doi:10.1093/carcin/bgl232
advance access publication december 5, 2006
quercetin mediates preferential degradation of oncogenic ras and causes autophagy
in ha-ras-transformed human colon cells
faiy h.psahoulia1,3, sophy moumtzi1, michael
l.roberts1,4, takehiko sasazuki2, senji shirasawa2 and
alexander pintzas1,
1laboratory of signal mediated gene expression, institute of biological
research and biotechnology, national hellenic research foundation, 48 vas.
konstantinou avenue, athens 11635, greece, 2department of pathology,
international medical center of japan, 1-21-1 toyama, shinjuku, tokyo
162-8655, japan, 3department of medicine, school of health sciences,
university of thessaly, 22 papakyriazi street, larisa 41222, greece,
4present address: regulon sa, 7, gregoriou afxentiou, athens 17455, greece
to whom correspondence should be addressed. tel: þ30 210 727 3753;
fax: þ30 210 727 3745;
email: apint@eie.gr
several food polyphenols act as chemopreventers by reducing the
incidence of many types of cancer, especially in colon epithelia. in
this study, we have investigated whether the ﬂavonoid quercetin
can modulate cell proliferation and survival by targeting key
molecules and/or biological processes responsible for tumor cell
properties. the effect of quercetin on the expression of ras onco-
proteins was speciﬁcally studied using systems of either constitu-
tive or conditional expression of oncogenic ras in human
epithelial cells. our ﬁndings suggest that quercetin inhibits
cell viability as well as cancer cell properties like anchorage-
independent growth. these ﬁndings were further supported at
the molecular level, since quercetin treatment resulted in a pref-
erential reduction of ras protein levels in cell lines expressing
oncogenic ras proteins. notably, in cells that only express wild-
type ras or in those where the oncogenic ras allele was knocked
out, quercetin had no evident effects upon ras levels. we have
shown that quercetin drastically reduces half-life of oncogenic
ras but has no effect when the cells are treated with a proteasome
inhibitor. moreover, in ha-ras-transformed cells, quercetin in-
duces autophagic processes. since quercetin downregulates the
levels of oncogenic ras in cancer cells, we propose that this ﬂavo-
noid could act as a chemopreventive agent for cancers with fre-
quent mutations of ras genes.
introduction
cancer is the result of a stepwise, progressive disruption of signaling
cascades that control cell proliferation, survival and differentiation
(1). the goal of cancer prevention is to identify carcinogenic changes
as early as possible in order to increase the window for successful
intervention, to avoid initiation and to suppress oncogenic transfor-
mation of precancer cells and/or to induce safe removal of damaged
cells. in vitro experiments supported by animal investigations as
well as epidemiological studies of human colorectal cancer suggest
that the development of this disease can be modulated by dietary
factors (2). several food polyphenols may act as chemopreventers
by reducing the incidence of many types of cancer (3), especially in
colon epithelia (4,5).
abbreviations: facs, ﬂuorescence-activated cell sorter; fbs, fetal bovine
serum; fhc, familial hypercholesterolemia; lc3, microtubule-associated
protein light chain 3; mdc, monodansylcadaverin; pbs, phosphate-buffered
saline; pon, ponasterone-a.
in nature
that has been described as
quercetin (3,3#,4#,5,7-pentahydroxyﬂavone) is a ﬂavonoid mole-
cule ubiquitous
potential anticancer agent (5) because of its ability to modulate cell
proliferation (6), survival and differentiation and target key molecules
responsible for tumor cell properties (7–9). quercetin appears to be
associated with little toxicity when administered orally or i.v. whereas
in vitro and preliminary animal and human data indicate that quercetin
inhibits tumor growth.
ras gtpases act as molecular switches to transduce extracellular
signals to the nucleus, where they regulate an overlapping set of
cellular responses (10). mutations of ras genes abolish the gap-
induced gtp hydrolysis of ras leading to a constitutively activated
ras protein and have been found in a 50% of tumors suggesting that it
plays an important role in tumor development (11,12). from the three
isoforms (ki-, ha- and n-ras), ki-ras oncogene mutations espe-
cially at codon 12 represent 90% of all ras mutations in colon can-
cers (13). quercetin has been shown to reverse the transformed
phenotype of v-ha-ras nih3t3 cells (14).
two major mechanisms are employed by eukaryotic cells to de-
grade intracellular proteins. the proteasome is a large multiprotein
complex that has a critical role in the degradation of ubiquitylated
proteins (15,16). autophagy (type ii programmed cell death) has been
deﬁned as a critical process by which long-lived proteins or entire
organelles are degraded by the cell’s own lysosomic system. it has
signiﬁcant association with the maintenance of cellular homeostasis
and cell viability (17,18), but it is also a mechanism of cell suicide. in
cancer cells, autophagic capacity is lower than the respective normal
tissue, proposing that autophagic cell death is lost during malignant
transformation. oncogenic ha-ras protein has been proposed to in-
duce type-ii programmed cell death in glioma and gastric cell lines, in
contrast to ki- and n-ras oncoproteins (19). microtubule-associated
protein light chain 3 (lc3) protein, a homologue of yeast apg8, is
localized in autophagosomes and autolysosomes membranes after
processing. also, the amount of lc3ii-cleaved product is correlated
to the extent of autophagosome formation, providing the ﬁrst molec-
ular marker for the detection of autophagic activity (20).
prompted by these observations, we have used systems of human
colorectal cancer development as well as constitutive and conditional
expression of ras in human cells in parallel studies, in order to in-
vestigate whether quercetin can modulate cell survival and in vitro
tumor properties. our ﬁndings demonstrate for the ﬁrst time that
quercetin reduces the half-life of oncogenic ras protein levels by
a process that is inhibited by the proteasome inhibitor mg132 that
could account for its ability of quercetin to inhibit cell growth and
tumor properties. in addition, we indicate that quercetin induces au-
tophagy speciﬁcally in ha-ras-transformed cells.
materials and methods
cell culture
caco-2, dld1, ht-29, sw620 hke-3 and hct-116 cell lines were obtained
from atcc (university boulevard, manassas, va 20110-2209 usa). fhc
cells were a kind gift from dr martina kovarikova (institute of biophysics,
academy of science of czech rep). the dko-4 and hke-3 cell lines were
derived from the human colon adenocarcinoma cell lines dld-1 and hct-
116, respectively, by disruption of the oncogenic ki-ras allele (21). human
colon cell lines and the ras overexpressing clones derived from caco-2 (22)
were cultured in dulbecco’s modiﬁed eagle’s medium supplemented with 10%
ó the author 2006. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
the online version of this article has been published under an open access model. users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the journal and oxford university press are
attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. for commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
f.h.psahoulia et al.
fetal bovine serum (fbs), antibiotics and non-essential amino acids (invitro-
gen life technologies, paisley, uk). human colon cells familial hypercholes-
terolemia (fhc) were cultured in dulbecco’s modiﬁed eagle’s medium
supplemented with 25 mm hepes, 10 ng/ml cholerotoxin, 5 lg/ml insulin,
5 lg/ml transferin and 100 ng/ml hydrocortisone. the human colon cell line
rgc-2 was provided by prof. christos paraskeva (uk).
the caco-2 clones constitutively expressing active ras proteins have
already been described (22). for the present study, the empty vector neo
(caco-n10), ha-rasv12-transformed (caco-h2) and ki-rasv12-trans-
formed (caco-k15) clones have been selected due to their moderate levels
of the ectopically expressed oncogenes.
for the preparation of 293indras cells (s.s. moumtzi, m.l. roberts,
s. frillingos, t. fotsis and a. pintzas, in preparation), hek293 cells were
cotransfected with pvgrxr and pind-ha-ras. addition of ponasterone-a
(pon), homologue of ecdysone (invitrogen), induces the expression of ha-ras
oncogene.
cell viability
cells on 12-well plates were treated or not with quercetin (sigma, missuri,
usa) at the indicated conditions. cells were ﬁxed with methanol, stained with
0.5% crystal violet, washed with phosphate-buffered saline (pbs) and the
remaining crystal violet was extracted using 30% acetic acid. the 293indras
cells, following 24 h incubation with 0.5% serum, were stimulated with 0.125
lm of pon in the presence of serum for additional 48 h. when indicated,
quercetin was added for the last 24 h. the cells were ﬁxed and stained as
previously. absorbance was measured at 595 nm.
flow cytometry
cells were treated with quercetin or not, washed with pbs and ﬁxed overnight
with 70% ethanol at  20°c. following further washing, 20 lg/ml rnasea and
1 mg/ml propidium iodide in pbs were added to the cells. after incubation at
37°c for 20 min, the samples were analyzed by ﬂow cytometry.
colony formation in soft agar
a total of 104 cells were suspended in 0.3% (wt/vol) agarose in dulbecco’s
modiﬁed eagle’s medium containing 10% fbs and layered over a solid base of
0.5% (wt/vol) agarose in six-well cultured dishes. top medium alone or with
quercetin and/or pon was changed every 2 days. after 20 days, colonies in the
top agarose layer were stained with 0.005% crystal violet in methanol and
counted under a light microscope.
migration assay
transwell chambers (costar, ny, usa) with 8 lm diameter pores, in which the
outer membrane was coated with ﬁbronectin, were used to estimate the migra-
tory capacity of the cells using a method described (23). cells (105 per ml) in
1% fbs-containing medium were incubated for 36 h in the absence or pres-
ence of quercetin and the cells that migrated to the bottom compartment were
ﬁxed, stained with 0.5% crystal violet and counted under a light microscope at
magniﬁcation 40.
immunoblotting
for the detection of ras variants, the proteins were extracted as described (24).
the lysates were subjected to sds-page and transferred to nitrocellulose
membranes (protran, dassel, germany). immunoblot was performed using
speciﬁc primary antibodies (santa cruz biotechnology, santa cruz, ca)
against ki-ras (sc-30), ha-ras (sc-29), ha-ras (sc-35) and secondary anti-
bodies by jackson. the membranes were scanned with image storm scanner
(molecular dynamics, sunnyvale, uk) using the ecl-detection system
(amersham biosciences, piscataway, nj) and the values were measured us-
ing imagequant software (molecular dynamics). erk-2 (sc-1647) or beta-
actin (ab8226, abcam, uk) was used for normalization. experiments were
repeated at least three times and standard deviation function was used for error
bar generation.
in pulse-chase experiments, 293indras cells were pretreated or not with
quercetin for 24 h. subsequently, they were incubated with pon (0.125 lm)
to induce oncogenic ha-ras expression. total proteins were extracted and the
levels of the ras protein were detected by immunoblotting. in ras protein
degradation experiments, pon was removed after 24 h induction and the cells
were incubated with complete medium alone or supplemented with 20 lm
quercetin and/or 15 lm mg132 (biomol, exeter, uk) for the indicated times.
immunoblot analysis was performed.
phalloidin staining
following 48 h treatment with 20 lm quercetin, the cells were ﬁxed with 4%
pbs-buffered paraformaldehyde for 20 min, washed with pbs, quenched with
50 mm nh4cl and permeabilized with 0.1% triton x-100. the cells were
incubated for 1 h with rhodamine-labeled phalloidin (amersham biosciences)
1022
in pbs at room temperature and, after further washing, the actin organiza-
tion was observed under a ﬂuorescent inverted microscope (nikon eclipse
t-200).
transient transfection with egfp-lc3 and visualization of mdc-labeled
vacuoles
the pegfp-lc3 plasmid was kindly provided by noboru mizushima and
tamotsu yoshimori (national institute for basic biology, okazaki, japan).
caco-h2 cells grown in six-well plates at 50% conﬂuency were transfected
with pegfp-lc3 using the bes buffered saline transfection reagent (25).
after 24 h, the cells were incubated with 10 mm 3-methyladenine (sigma)
for 3 h, when necessary, subjected to quercetin treatment for additional 20 h
and labeled with 0.05 mm monodansylcadaverin (mdc) (sigma) in pbs at
37°c for 15 min. cells were ﬁxed with 4% paraforlmadehyde, washed with
pbs and immediately analyzed by ﬂuorescence microscopy. images were
obtained using a ﬂuorescent inverted microscope (nikon eclipse t-200) with
a digital camera.
statistical evaluation
differences between control and treated cells were evaluated using student’s
t-test. a p value ,0.05 was considered signiﬁcant.
results
cell viability of colon cancer cells was reduced by quercetin
to examine the inhibitory effects of quercetin on the cell viability of
human colon cells, cell lines with different mutation proﬁle represent-
ing consecutive stages of human colorectal carcinogenesis were trea-
ted with different concentrations and time periods of the compound.
figure 1a shows a differential response of colon cell lines to querce-
tin. growth of dld-1 colon adenocarcinoma cells was inhibited even
in the lower concentration tested (10 lm) and the effect started very
early. after 48 h treatment with 20 lm quercetin, the number of viable
cells in the case of dld-1 was 28% of the untreated cells, whereas
in the case of caco-2 intermediate adenoma cells was 53% of the
untreated cells and in that of fhc was even higher (60%). rgc-2
adenoma cells showed also a limited sensitivity to quercetin (not
shown). in ht-29 carcinoma cells, the percentage of viable cells
reached the 65% of the untreated after 48 h, an observation that showed
a relative tolerance of these cells to quercetin. the potential of quer-
cetin to trigger apoptosis in adenocarcinoma cell lines was examined
by hoechst33258 staining. under treatment with low quercetin con-
centrations (20 lm), the percentage of apoptotic cells was very low
(5–7%) as was also conﬁrmed by the absence of poly-adp-ribose
polymerase cleavage or co-treatment with the general caspase inhibitor
zvad-fmk (not shown). in addition, propidium iodide staining
showed no signiﬁcant levels of necrosis in treated colon adenocarci-
noma cells (not shown).
after these observations, we examined the ability of quercetin to
modulate the cell cycle proﬁle of caco-2, dld-1 and ht-29 colon
cells. fluorescence-activated cell sorter (facs) analysis (figure 1b)
showed that quercetin treatment for 48 h increased the s-phase pop-
ulation in both caco-2 and dld-1 cells (1.8-fold) and decreased the
cell population in g1 phase. the cell cycle of ht-29 colon cancer cells
was slightly affected by quercetin at 48 h. the percentage of the cells
in sub-g1 phase did not signiﬁcantly increase by quercetin in these
cell lines and this was a further indication that the ﬂavonoid does not
induce apoptosis in these conditions.
quercetin inhibits in vitro tumor properties of colon cells
to examine the potency of inhibition of tumor properties by quercetin,
we ﬁrst observed the growth of the cells in soft agar in the presence of
quercetin. in caco-2, dld-1 and ht-29 human colon cells, exposure
to 5 and 10 lm of quercetin for 10 days reduced their ability to form
colonies in semisolid agar (figure 2a). in vitro migration of tumor
cells has been used to characterize their ability to bind to the extra-
cellular matrix, playing an important role in tumor progression and
metastasis. figure 2b shows that the number of dld-1 and ht-29
cells migrated through ﬁlter coated with ﬁbronectin was remarkably
reduced by subapoptotic concentrations of quercetin (5 and 10 lm),
after 36 h incubation. the ability of the compound to rearrange the
architecture of the actin cytoskeleton was next examined after treat-
ment of caco-2, dld-1 and ht-29 cells with 20 lm quercetin for 48
h. phalloidin staining showed a reorganization of the cytoskeleton in
treated cells, disruption of actin stress ﬁbers and aggregation of actin
at the cell periphery as well as reduced overall actin staining (figure
2c). the effect was lower in ht-29 cells.
oncogenic ras transformation sensitizes the cells to quercetin
since ras proteins play an important role in cell transformation,
survival, proliferation and cell death, we examined quercetin effects
in ras-transformed human colon cells (22), as well as in colon ade-
nocarcinoma cells lacking oncogenic ras by homologous recombi-
nation (21).
the empty vector n10 (caco-n10), ha-rasv12-transformed (caco-
h2) and ki-rasv12-transformed (caco-k15) clones derived from
caco-2 cells have been selected, due to their moderate levels of
the ectopically expressed oncogenes (22). figure 3a shows that the
ras-transformed cells caco-k15 and caco-h2 were more sensitive to
the inhibition of cell viability by quercetin than the caco-n10 cells.
after 48 h treatment of caco-n10 cells, the percentage of viable cells
was 56 of the untreated, as compared with the 46% in the case of the
caco-k15 and the 38% of the untreated in the case of caco-h2. in
the light of these ﬁndings, we asked if there was any interplay between
the mutant ras protein and the cell sensitivity to quercetin. therefore,
we checked if disruption of ras oncogene would result in different
sensitivity of the cell growth to quercetin. to conﬁrm this, we com-
pared the growth rates in the presence of quercetin between the
dld-1 and hct-116 colon adenocarcinoma cells and their derived
cells dko-4 and hke-3, respectively,
that bear the oncogenic
ki-ras allele disrupted by homologous recombination (21). figure
3b indicates the cell growth rates of dld-1 in which quercetin treat-
ment for 48 h resulted in a 72% reduction of cell viability and dko-4
cells in which quercetin caused only a 42% reduction. similarly,
hct-116 cells bearing the ki-ras mutation were more sensitive to
quercetin than hke-3 cells. these indicated that the ras oncogene
sensitized the cells to quercetin inhibitory effects. next, we performed
facs analysis in untreated and treated with quercetin caco-2 clones
for 48 h. figure 3c clearly indicates that quercetin resulted in an
accumulation of the caco-k15 cells in both s phase (2-fold) and
g2 phase (1.6-fold), comparing with the untreated cells, whereas the
population of the cells in g1 phase was reduced to 50% of control. in
contrast, quercetin had no evident effect in the cell cycle of caco-h2
cells, indicating that the compound does not reduce the viability of
these cells through cell cycle alterations. in the case of the caco-n10
empty vector cells, the results obtained were similar to caco-2 (see
figure 1b).
quercetin reduces oncogenic ras protein levels in oncogenic ras-
expressing cells but not in wild-type ras-expressing cells
quercetin has been shown to modulate different signaling pathways. in
the attempt to examine the effects of quercetin on ras protein levels,
we analyzed ha- and ki-ras proteins using speciﬁc antibodies, tested
against puriﬁed proteins (24). dld-1 colon cancer cells were exposed
to 20 lm quercetin for 24 and 48 h and the ki-ras protein levels were
analyzed by western blot. figure 4a shows that quercetin reduced
the oncogenic ki-ras protein levels to 52% at 24 h and 45% at 48 h.
notably, quercetin treatment of the sw620 colon adenocarcinoma
cells, which are homozygous for the oncogenic ki-ras, also resulted
in remarkably reduced ras protein levels. moreover, in caco-k15 and
caco-h2 cells that ectopically overexpress oncogenic ki- and ha-ras
proteins, respectively, ras levels were also reduced by quercetin, but
not in caco-n10 that only express the wild-type proteins. more spe-
ciﬁcally, following 48 h treatment with quercetin, oncogenic ki-ras
protein levels of caco-k15 cells were reduced to half of the levels of
ki-ras protein in untreated cells and ha-ras protein levels of caco-h2
cells were similarly reduced comparing with the ha-ras protein levels
of untreated cells. in contrast, in caco-n10 cells there was no remark-
able downregulation of ki- or ha-ras wild-type proteins (figure 4b).
quercetin causes oncogenic ras degradation and autophagy
in addition, in dko-4 cells lacking oncogenic ras there was no effect
on ras protein levels after quercetin treatment (figure 4a) which
further supports our hypothesis that quercetin reduces the levels of
oncogenic ras proteins. more cell lines were tested for wild-type
ras protein degradation (caco-2 and ht-29 do not harbor oncogenic
ras forms) and no effect of quercetin on ras protein levels has been
observed (not shown). overall, we present evidence from several colon
cell lines expressing oncogenic ras (dld-1, sw620 and caco-2 on-
cogenic ras overexpressing) that ras oncoprotein is a target of quer-
cetin-mediated cell growth inhibition.
quercetin accelerates degradation of induced oncogenic ras proteins
in an inducible ras cell system by a process prevented by the
proteasome inhibitor mg132
to further investigate the hypothesis that quercetin selectively targets
oncogenic ras proteins and reduces the oncogenic potential of cells,
we performed pulse-chase experiments using hek293 cells inducibly
expressing oncogenic ha-ras (293indras, moumtzi et al., in pre-
paration). viability assay showed that the induction of oncogenic
ha-ras in the presence of serum increased cell growth and doubled
the cell number after 48 h comparing with cells grown in 0.5%
fbs-containing medium. however, co-treatment with quercetin
signiﬁcantly eliminated cell viability and, notably, the cell number
after 48 h approached the levels of untreated cells (figure 5a, left
panel). furthermore, the addition of serum and pon increased the abil-
ity of 293indras to form colonies in soft agar, but in quercetin-treated
cells anchorage-independent growth was reduced. the ﬁndings indi-
cate that the compound reversed the effects of oncogenic ras expres-
sion in induced cells (figure 5a, right panel)
pretreatment of 293indras cells with 20 lm quercetin for 24 h
reduced the levels of induced oncogenic ras protein, compared with
no pretreated with quercetin-induced cells (figure 5b, left panel). we
next showed that quercetin reduces the half-life of newly synthesized
oncogenic ras proteins. ha-ras expression was induced for 24 h
(pulse) and then cells were washed with medium and newly synthe-
sized protein was left for degradation in new free-ponasterone me-
dium (chase) in the presence or absence of quercetin. whole cell
lysates were prepared after the indicated times and the levels of the
remaining protein were analyzed by western blot (figure 5b, right
panel) using two different antibodies that recognize ha-ras. probing
with ha-ras-speciﬁc antibody resulted in the presence of two speciﬁc
bands (24). ras oncoprotein had increased degradation rate in the
presence of the polyphenol. the half-life of the oncogenic protein
was 4.6 h, whereas in the presence of quercetin it was 2.4 h.
nevertheless, the mechanism responsible for quercetin-induced
ha-ras degradation remained unclear. we asked if oncogenic ras
protein levels were reduced by a proteasome-mediated process. to
this end, newly synthesized ha-ras protein in 293indras cells was
left for degradation in the presence of quercetin and mg132, a 26s
proteasome inhibitor, for 6 h. figure 5c shows that mg132 stabilized
ha-ras oncoprotein and this prevented the protein from quercetin-
induced degradation.
induction of autophagy in colon cancer cells is facilitated by ha-ras
a marked vacuolization of the cytoplasm was observed after treat-
ment of caco-h2 cells with quercetin for 24 h (figure 6a, left panel).
in contrast, control clones (caco-n10) as well as the caco-k15 re-
sisted quercetin-induced vacuolization (figure 6a, left panel). this
vacuolization was a ﬁrst indication of autophagic processes and was
also observed in two other ha-ras-transformed caco-2 clones exam-
ined. to further identify autophagy in these cells, we employed ﬂuo-
rescent staining with mdc that has been reported to be a speciﬁc
marker for autophagic vacuoles (26). following incubation with 20
lm quercetin, the cells were stained with mdc and analyzed by
ﬂuorescence microscopy. the data presented in figure 6a (right
panel) indicate an increased dot-like pattern of mdc staining in
the cytoplasm. in control cultures, only very few cells presented the
same pattern. in order to conﬁrm the involvement of the autophagic
pathway, the cells were treated with the inhibitor 3-methyladenine,
1023
f.h.psahoulia et al.
1024
which inhibits autophagy at the early stages (27). this resulted in the
inhibition of quercetin-induced vacuolization (figure 6b). the gen-
eral caspase inhibitor zvad-fmk failed to inhibit quercetin-induced
vacuolization, showing that this phenomenon was caspase indepen-
dent. inhibition of vacuolization was reversed after complete medium
addition (figure 6b). in the light of these observations, we monitored
mdc colocalization with lc3 protein that is localized in autophago-
some membranes after processing (20). transient overexpression of
egfp-lc3 in caco-h2 cells followed by incubation with quercetin for
20 h, egfp-lc3 showed a punctuate pattern (figure 6c, green, mid-
dle), which was a strong indication of autophagic activation. in con-
trast, in untreated cells egfp-lc3 presented a diffuse redistribution
(figure 6c, green, top) that was similar to the cells that were co-
treated with the inhibitor 3-methyladenine (figure 6c, bottom).
parallel staining with mdc showed that some of the mdc-labeled
autophagic vacuoles are overlapped with egfp-lc3 (figure 6, right
panel). this conﬁrmed the activation of autophagic functions in ras-
transformed cells that are further exploited with quercetin treatment.
discussion
the selection of active molecules that prevent or inhibit oncogenic
transformation represents a major research interest. our main ﬁnding
was that quercetin inhibited proliferation and cancer properties of
colon adenocarcinoma and early adenoma cells, partially by selec-
tively inducing degradation of oncogenic forms of ras proteins.
quercetin induces autophagy in ha-ras-transformed cells
many studies provide evidence that quercetin has inhibitory effects on
cell proliferation of human colon cancer cells (6,28,29) and occasion-
ally induces apoptosis in high concentrations. here, using low querce-
tin concentrations, we indicated a differential response on cell cycle
and viability between dld-1, ht-29 adenocarcinoma and caco-2
intermediate adenoma cells. notably, these cell lines bear different
endogenous oncogenic mutations and this could be an explanation of
their different behavior upon quercetin treatment. more speciﬁcally,
in addition to apc and p53 mutations, dld-1 cells bear ki-ras and
pi-3k mutations, whereas ht-29 cells bear a b-raf mutation.
in our system, all ﬁndings indicate that apoptosis was not the main
way by which quercetin reduced cell viability of colon adenocarcinoma
cells under the conditions tested. here, the experiments clearly dem-
onstrated that in the case of caco-h2 cells quercetin induces autoph-
agy, a type of cell death distinct from apoptosis that is caspase
independent. the expression of oncogenic ha-ras has been proposed
to induce autophagy in glioma and gastric cancer cells (19). also, the
ras(g12v,t35s) mutant stimulates autophagy in ht-29 colon cancer
cells (30). we propose that oncogenic ha-ras sensitizes the cells to
autophagy, a process that was further promoted by quercetin and this
accounts for the reduced cell viability of caco-h2 cells after quercetin
treatment. in addition, facs analysis clearly showed the different
effects of quercetin on caco-k15 and caco-h2 cells, indicating a
ki- or ha-ras oncogene-speciﬁc response, possibly due to their dif-
ferential localization and regulation (31,32). it was evident that quer-
cetin mainly affected the cell cycle of the caco-k15 cells and promoted
autophagy primed by the ha-rasv12 oncogene in the caco-h2 cells.
quercetin mediates accelerated degradation of oncogenic ras
proteins
oncogenic ras proteins are constitutively activated, in contrast to the
wild-type proteins and these mutants indicate considerably different
quercetin causes oncogenic ras degradation and autophagy
behavior and complexity of interactions among their downstream
effectors. interestingly, other gtpases (such as rac and rho) from
the same superfamily are shown to be more sensitive to degradation
when active than inactive (33,34). also, the selective degradation of
oncogenic proteins, by anticancer drugs has been shown (35). here,
the antitumor properties of quercetin as well as some of its inhibitory
effects are correlated to the oncogenic ras expression, which
suggests that the oncogene sensitizes the cells to quercetin. using
several cell models of human cancer, it was indicated for the ﬁrst time
that quercetin preferentially reduces oncogenic ras protein versus
wild-type ras by a post-translational mechanism, although other
mechanisms of regulation of ras proteins have been proposed (9).
to determine the level of quercetin innolvement on ras regulation,
we used a human cell model of inducible ras expression (293indras
cells). we demonstrated that quercetin decreased the half-life of in-
ducibly overexpressed ras oncoprotein and subsequently reversed the
in vitro tumor properties induced by the expression of oncogenic ras
in 293indras cells. in early studies, it has been shown that the half-life
of the mrna of mouse ras was 5—7 h (36), whereas the half-life of
ras protein in rat cells was 20 h (37). in this inducible human ras
cell system, the half-life of the newly synthesized oncogenic ha-ras
protein was 4.6 h and it was reduced in half after treatment with
quercetin. it is tempting to assume that the low half-life in our system
is due to the constitutive binding of ras to gtp and that quercetin, by
an undeﬁned mechanism, accelerates the degradation process. our
ﬁndings indicate for the ﬁrst time that quercetin reduced oncogenic
ras protein levels by accelerating the degradation mediated by the
proteasome function, as indicated by the proteasome inhibitor exper-
iment. similarly, in a recent report in human ﬁbroblasts, ha-ras pro-
tein was shown to be stabilized after treatment with mg132 (38). at
present, the exact mechanism of quercetin on ras protein degradation
is not determined. interestingly, it has been shown that ha-ras pro-
teins are modiﬁed by mono- and di-ubiquitination in order to target to
the endosomes (39). however, there are no reports for direct poly-
ubiquitination that signals for proteasomal degradation of ras pro-
teins. therefore, it is probably that the effect of quercetin on onco-
genic gtp-bound ras proteins is mediated through the proteasomal
degradation of a factor that affects the stability of ras. it has been
proposed that activation of erk1/2 and high ros levels stabilize ha-
ras protein, by inhibiting proteasomal degradation (38). future stud-
ies will be directed at examining the potential role of the proteasome
in this process.
in figures 4 and 5, we tested the effect of quercetin on ras protein
levels in cells expressing oncogenic and/or wild-type ras. it was
evident that quercetin preferentially reduces ras levels only in cells
that bear a ras mutation. in detail, in dld-1 and dko-4 cells the
endogenous ki-ras, either wild-type or mutant, is under the control
of the endogenous promoter and quercetin only reduced ras levels in
the dld-1 where oncogenic ki-ras is expressed. similarly, querce-
tin reduced ras levels only in the cells caco-k15, caco-h2 and
293indras that exogenously express oncogenic ras and not in ca-
co-2 or non-induced 293indras cells, whereas ras mrna levels
remained unaffected by quercetin in all cases (not shown). it is there-
fore reasonable to assume that quercetin reduced ras protein levels by
a mechanism that was not transcriptionally dependent and was selec-
tive for oncogenic gtp-bound ras proteins. moreover, these ﬁndings
indicate that quercetin-induced oncogenic ras protein degradation
was mediated by a proteasome-driven process, although further in-
vestigation is needed in order to examine if this is a direct effect of the
proteasome on ras or by a more indirect way.
fig. 1. quercetin inhibits cell growth and induces cell cycle arrest in human colon cell lines. (a) colon cells were plated and cultured with complete (10% fbs-
containing) medium for 24 h. after this period, the cells were cultured in fresh medium containing 10, 20 or 50 lm quercetin for 24 and 48 h. control cells were
treated with dmso. every 24 h, fresh medium supplemented with dmso or quercetin was added. after the incubation period, the viable cells were measured by
crystal violet staining, as described in ômaterials and methodsõ. fold change of cell viability is presented as the od of viable cells/od of cells counted on day 0.
standard deviation function is used for error bar generation. (b) colon cells were treated for 48 h with 20 lm quercetin. control cells were incubated in the
presence of dmso. after ﬁxation, a pbs solution containing 20 lg/ml rnasea and 1 mg/ml pi was added and the samples were analyzed by ﬂow cytometry
(m1, sub-g1phase; m2, g1phase; m3, s phase; m4, g2/m phase).
1025
f.h.psahoulia et al.
fig. 2. quercetin inhibits anchorage-independent growth and in vitro migration of human colon cell lines. it also modulates the cytoskeleton organization.
(a) (top) in soft agar assay, colonies in the top agarose layer formed by untreated cells (control) and cells treated with 5 and 10 lm quercetin after 20 days
incubation were stained with 0.005% crystal violet and counted under a light microscope. the fold change of the number of the colonies formed by colon cells after
treatment with quercetin compared with those formed by untreated cells (control) is shown at the graph. the differences observed between untreated and treated
with quercetin cells were statistically signiﬁcant as determined by student’s t-test. (bottom) the table shows the effect of quercetin on the total numbers of colonies
formed by caco-2, dld-1 and ht-29 cells as presented in the graph. avalues represent mean ±sd of three separate experiments, each consisting of duplicate
cultures. (b) (top) cells in low serum (0.5%) minus or plus quercetin (5 or 10 lm) were seeded to the upper surface of a polycarbonate ﬁlter coated with ﬁbronectin
and they allowed to migrate for 36 h. cells that migrated through the surface of the membrane were stained with crystal violet and counted by light microscopy. the
results of three independent experiments are shown at the graph as fold change of the number of the migrated cells after treatment with quercetin compared with the
untreated migrated cells (control) and standard deviation function is used for error bar generation. (bottom) the table shows the effect of quercetin on the total
numbers of migrated cells as presented in the graph. avalues represent mean ±sd of three separate experiments, each consisting of duplicate cultures. (c) caco-2,
dld-1 and ht-29 colon cells were treated with 20 lm quercetin for 48 h. after ﬁxing with 4% parafolmadehyde and washing with pbs, the cells were stained
with phalloidin for 1 h and the actin cytoskeleton was analyzed under a ﬂuorescent inverted microscope (nikon eclipse t-200). representative pictures are shown.
anchorage-independent growth is an important property of trans-
forming activity of the cells that have acquired oncogenic capacities.
as illustrated in figure 2, ht-29 colon adenocarcinoma cells had a
stronger ability to form colonies in semisolid agar than the adenocar-
cinoma dld-1 (40) and the early adenoma caco-2 cells, a result that
was correlated with their transformation stage. moreover, quercetin
1026
fig. 3. transformation by oncogenic ras modulates the effect of quercetin on cell viability. (a) viability assay was performed for caco-n10, caco-k15, caco-h2 cells either untreated or treated with 20 lm
quercetin for 24 and 48 h. viable cells were measured by crystal violet staining as described in ômaterials and methodsõ. fold change of cell viability is presented as the od of viable cells/od of cells counted on day 0.
standard deviation function is used for error bar generation. (b) comparison of cell viability between dko-4 and dld-1 cells as well as between hke-3 and hct-116 cells after treatment with 20 lm quercetin for
24 and 48 h. the cells were subjected to viability assay and fold change of cell viability is presented as in (a). (c) caco-k15 and caco-h2 cells were treated for 48 h with 20 lm quercetin and were analyzed by ﬂow
cytometry, as in fig. 1b.
 at mahidol university, faculty of medicine, siriraj hospital on february 26, 2015
http://carcin.oxfordjournals.org/
downloaded from 
f.h.psahoulia et al.
fig. 4. quercetin reduces oncogenic ras protein levels. (a) (top) western blot analysis of control (untreated cells, time 0) and quercetin treated cells. colon cell
lines dld-1, sw620 and dko-4 were either left untreated or treated with 20 lm quercetin for 24 and 48 h and the levels of the ki-ras proteins were analyzed by
western blot using a speciﬁc antibody. (bottom) quantitive analysis of the change of ki-ras protein levels compared with control (c, untreated) cells after
normalization to the total erk-2 protein. the bars represent the standard error of the mean of at least three experiments. (b) (top) caco-h2 cells were subjected to
quercetin treatment (20 lm) as previously. immunoblot analysis was performed using speciﬁc antibodies that recognize ki- or ha-ras proteins and the samples
were analyzed for the relative levels of total oncogenic ras proteins in control (time 0) and quercetin-treated cells for the indicated times. figure shows
representative blots from at least three independent experiments of different cultures. (bottom) total levels of ras proteins are normalized to erk-2 and
represented by a graph comparing the levels of ras proteins in treated cells with those in untreated cells. standard deviation function is used for error bar
generation.
efﬁciently reduced the number of colonies formed in all cell lines.
migration is a perquisite for invasion and one of the most important
in vitro tumorigenic properties. quercetin has been shown to inhibit
the invasive migratory properties of human melanoma cell lines
(41). consistent with these observations, in colon cell lines tested,
quercetin resulted in reduced cell migration capacity and a general
rearrangement of the actin cytoskeleton. these data suggest the
potential effect of the polyphenol on fak and integrin-mediated
signaling.
the aim of cancer chemoprevention is to select active molecules
that prevent or inhibit oncogenic transformation. since the expression
of ras oncogenic proteins is essential for transformation, it is impor-
tant to identify molecules that inhibit their actions. the ability of
quercetin to induce degradation of ki- and ha-ras oncoproteins gives
the possibility that the polyphenol could be used for the targeting of
that are caused by ras activation.
many types of cancer
importantly, in the case of human colorectal cancer it would be pos-
sible that quercetin is efﬁcient in cancer prevention, given that this
type of cancer is nutrition affected and often presents oncogenic ras
mutations in its early stages. future work is needed to study the effect
of quercetin on signal transduction events in which ras-mediated
signaling pathways are involved.
1028
quercetin causes oncogenic ras degradation and autophagy
fig. 5. quercetin prevents ras-induced cancer properties and accelerates ras protein degradation through the proteasome machinery. (a) (left) following 24 h
incubation in 0.5% serum, the 293indras cells were stimulated with pon in the presence of 10% serum for additional 48 h. where indicated, quercetin (20 lm) was
added for the last 24 h. the cells were ﬁxed, stained with crystal violet as described in ômaterials and methodsõ and absorbance was measured at 595 nm. fold
change of cell viability (od treated/od the 0.5% serum cells) is presented. (right) colony formation in soft agar in control (0.5% serum) and cells treated at the
indicated conditions for 20 days. (b) (left, top) following treatment with 20 lm quercetin for 24 h, 293indras cells were incubated with pon for additional 24 h to
induce rasexpression and total ha-ras protein levels were measured by western blot using either anti-ha-ras or anti-pan-ras antibodies. (right) 293indras cells
were treated for 24 h with pon and then, in order to estimate ras protein degradation, pon was removed and cells were incubated with complete medium alone or
supplemented with 20 lm quercetin. after the indicated times, total protein extracts were prepared and ha-ras protein levels were analyzed by western blot using
either anti-ha-ras or anti-pan-ras antibodies. representative blots are shown. (left, bottom) quantitative analysis of the levels of degraded ha-ras protein
presented in the western blot in the right, compared with the levels of ha-ras in induced cells (24 h pon). (c) 293indras cells were treated for 24 h with
ponesterone-a to induce ras expression. after 24 h, pon was removed and cells were incubated with complete (10% fbs-containing) medium alone or
supplemented with 20 lm quercetin and/or 15 lm mg132 for 6 h. then, ha-ras protein levels were analyzed by western blot and normalized to the total levels of
actin (ras/actin). in the right panel, the bars represent the results obtained by at least three experiments and standard deviation function is used for error bar
generation.
1029
f.h.psahoulia et al.
fig. 6. quercetin induces autophagy in caco-h2 cells. (a) (left) caco-n10, caco-k15 and caco-h2 cells were incubated in 10% fbs-containing medium
(control) or in medium containing 20 lm quercetin for 24 h and the cellular morphology was observed. cytoplasmic vacuolization appeared only in caco-h2 cells
(upper panel, untreated cells, lower panel, cells treated with 20 lm quercetin). (right) caco-h2 cells were treated with 20 lm quercetin for 24 h as in (a) and then
were incubated with 0.05 mm mdc in pbs at 37°c for 15 min. after ﬁxation with 4% paraforlmadehyde, the cells were immediately analyzed by ﬂuorescence
microscopy. (b) caco-h2 cells were cultured at the indicated conditions and the extend of vacuolization was observed under a light microscope. 3-methyladenine
was added to the culture medium 3 h before quercetin addition (see ômaterials and methodsõ). (c) a 24 h post-transfection of caco-h2 cells with a plasmid that
expresses the egfp-lc3 fusion protein, the cells were incubated in complete (10% fbs-containing) medium (top) or medium containing 20 lm quercetin without
(middle) or with (bottom) 0.05 mm of 3-methyladenine for additional 20 h, stained with mdc and ﬁxed. then, the cells were immediately analyzed by
ﬂuorescence microscopy and the pattern of the staining was visualized. representative pictures are shown.
1030
acknowledgements
this work was supported by greek general secretariat for research and tech-
nology research program pened 01ed227 and eu research program
hpmd-ct-2001-00116 to a.p. we thank dr simos g. and dr georgatsou
e., university of thessaly, for their helpful discussion. we also thank maria
evaggelidou, hellenic pasteur institute, for her assistance in facs analysis.
conﬂict of interest statement: none declared.
references
quercetin causes oncogenic ras degradation and autophagy
20. kabeya,y. et al. (2000) lc3, a mammalian homologue of yeast apg8p, is
localized in autophagosome membranes after processing. embo j, 19,
5720–5728.
21. shirasawa,s. et al. (1993) altered growth of human colon cancer cell lines
disrupted at activated ki-ras. science, 260, 85–88.
22. roberts,m.l. et al. (2006) microarray analysis of the differential trans-
formation mediated by kirsten and harvey ras oncogenes in a human
colorectal adenocarcinoma cell line. int. j. cancer, 118, 616–627.
23. de both,n.j. et al. (1999) a comparative evaluation of various invasion
assays testing colon carcinoma cell lines. br. j. cancer, 81, 934–941.
24. perez d,c.i. et al. (2004) ras activation in jurkat t cells following low-
grade stimulation of the t-cell receptor is speciﬁc to n-ras and occurs only
on the golgi apparatus. mol. cell. biol., 24, 3485–3496.
25. chen,c. et al. (1987) high-efﬁciency transformation of mammalian cells
1. vogelstein,b. et al. (1993) the multistep nature of cancer. trends genet,
by plasmid dna. mol. cell. biol., 7, 2745–2752.
9, 138–141.
26. biederbick,a. et al. (1995) monodansylcadaverine (mdc) is a speciﬁc
2. gustin,d.m. et al. (2002) chemoprevention of colon cancer: current status
in vivo marker for autophagic vacuoles. eur. j. cell biol., 66, 3–14.
and future prospects. cancer metastasis rev., 21, 323–348.
3. manson,m.m. (2003) cancer prevention—the potential for diet to modu-
late molecular signalling. trends mol. med., 9, 11–18.
4. glade,m.j. (1999) food, nutrition, and the prevention of cancer: a global
perspective. american institute for cancer research/world cancer re-
search fund, american institute for cancer research, 1997. nutrition,
15, 523–526.
5. stavric,b. (1994) quercetin in our diet: from potent mutagen to probable
anticarcinogen. clin. biochem., 27, 245–248.
6. hosokawa,n. et al. (1990) inhibitory effect of quercetin on the synthesis of
a possibly cell-cycle-related 17-kda protein, in human colon cancer cells.
int. j. cancer, 45, 1119–1124.
7. avila,m.a. et al. (1994) quercetin mediates the down-regulation of mutant
p53 in the human breast cancer cell line mda-mb468. cancer res., 54,
2424–2428.
8. ferry,d.r. et al. (1996) phase i clinical trial of the ﬂavonoid quercetin:
pharmacokinetics and evidence for in vivo tyrosine kinase inhibition. clin.
cancer res., 2, 659–668.
9. ranelletti,f.o. et al. (2000) quercetin inhibits p21-ras expression in hu-
man colon cancer cell lines and in primary colorectal tumors. int. j. cancer,
85, 438–445.
10. marais,r. et al. (1996) control of the erk map kinase cascade by ras and
raf. cancer surv, 27, 101–125.
11. bos,j.l. (1989) ras oncogenes in human cancer: a review. cancer res., 49,
4682–4689.
12. campbell,p.m. et al. (2004) oncogenic ras and its role in tumor cell in-
vasion and metastasis. semin. cancer biol., 14, 105–114.
13. bos,j.l. et al. (1987) prevalence of ras gene mutations in human colorectal
cancers. nature, 327, 293–297.
14. kuo,m.l. et al. (1995) reversion of v-h-ras-transformed nih 3t3 cells
by apigenin through inhibiting mitogen activated protein kinase and its
downstream oncogenes. biochem. biophys. res. commun., 212, 767–775.
15. rechsteiner,m. et al. (2005) mobilizing the proteolytic machine: cell
biological roles of proteasome activators and inhibitors. trends cell biol.,
15, 27–33.
16. ciechanover,a. (1994) the ubiquitin-proteasome proteolytic pathway.
cell, 79, 13–21.
17. boya,p. et al. (2005) inhibition of macroautophagy triggers apoptosis. mol.
cell. biol., 25, 1025–1040.
27. seglen,p.o. et al. (1982) 3-methyladenine: speciﬁc inhibitor of autophagic/
lysosomal protein degradation in isolated rat hepatocytes. proc. natl acad.
sci. usa, 79, 1889–1892.
28. dihal,a.a. et al. (2006) modulatory effects of quercetin on proliferation
and differentiation of the human colorectal cell line caco-2. cancer lett,
238, 248–259.
29. ranelletti,f.o. et al. (1992) growth-inhibitory effect of quercetin and pres-
ence of type-ii estrogen-binding sites in human colon-cancer cell lines and
primary colorectal tumors. int. j. cancer, 50, 486–492.
30. pattingre,s. et al. (2003) amino acids interfere with the erk1/2-dependent
control of macroautophagy by controlling the activation of raf-1 in human
colon cancer ht-29 cells. j. biol. chem., 278, 16667–16674.
31. apolloni,a. et al. (2000) h-ras but not k-ras trafﬁcs to the plasma
membrane through the exocytic pathway. mol. cell. biol., 20, 2475–
2487.
32. hancock,j.f. et al. (1989) all ras proteins are polyisoprenylated but only
some are palmitoylated. cell, 57, 1167–1177.
33. lynch,e.a. et al. (2006) proteasome-mediated degradation of rac1-gtp
during epithelial cell scattering. mol. biol. cell, 17, 2236–2242.
34. rolli-derkinderen,m. et al. (2005) phosphorylation of serine 188 protects
rhoa from ubiquitin/proteasome-mediated degradation in vascular smooth
muscle cells. circ. res., 96, 1152–1160.
35. da rocha,d.s. et al. (2005) activated b-raf is an hsp90 client protein that
is targeted by the anticancer drug 17-allylamino-17-demethoxygeldanamycin.
cancer res., 65, 10686–10691.
36. quincoces,a.f. et al. (1995) serum growth factors up-regulate h-ras, k-
ras, and n-ras proto-oncogenes in ﬁbroblasts. cell growth differ, 6, 271–279.
37. ulsh,l.s. et al. (1984) metabolic turnover of human c-rash p21 protein of
ej bladder carcinoma and its normal cellular and viral homologs. mol. cell.
biol., 4, 1647–1652.
38. svegliati,s. et al. (2005) platelet-derived growth factor and reactive oxygen
species (ros) regulate ras protein levels in primary human ﬁbroblasts via
erk1/2. ampliﬁcation of ros and ras in systemic sclerosis ﬁbroblasts.
j. biol. chem., 280, 36474–36482.
39. jura,n. et al. (2006) differential modiﬁcation of ras proteins by ubiquiti-
nation. mol. cell, 21, 679–687.
40. bellone,g. et al. (2001) aberrant activation of c-kit protects colon carci-
noma cells against apoptosis and enhances their invasive potential. cancer
res., 61, 2200–2206.
18. gozuacik,d. et al. (2004) autophagy as a cell death and tumor suppressor
41. caltagirone,s. et al. (2000) flavonoids apigenin and quercetin inhibit mel-
mechanism. oncogene, 23, 2891–2906.
anoma growth and metastatic potential. int. j. cancer, 87, 595–600.
19. chi,s. et al. (1999) oncogenic ras triggers cell suicide through the acti-
vation of a caspase-independent cell death program in human cancer cells.
oncogene, 18, 2281–2290.
received july 7, 2006; revised november 2, 2006;
accepted november 21, 2006
1031