the journal of biological chemistry vol. 281, no. 44, pp. 33635–33649, november 3, 2006
© 2006 by the american society for biochemistry and molecular biology, inc. printed in the u.s.a.
sitosterol-containing lipoproteins trigger free sterol-induced
caspase-independent death in acat-competent macrophages*
received for publication, july 3, 2006, and in revised form, august 16, 2006 published, jbc papers in press, august 24, 2006, doi 10.1074/jbc.m606339200
liping bao‡, yankun li‡, shi-xian deng‡, donald landry‡, and ira tabas‡§¶1
from the departments of ‡medicine, §pathology & cell biology, and ¶physiology & cellular biophysics, columbia university,
new york, new york 10032
sitosterolemia is a disease characterized by very high levels of
sitosterol and other plant sterols and premature atherothrom-
botic vascular disease. one theory holds that plant sterols can
directly promote atherosclerosis, but the mechanism is not
known. unesterified, or “free,” cholesterol (fc) is a potent
inducer of macrophage death, which causes plaque necrosis, a
precursor to atherothrombosis. fc-induced macrophage death,
however, requires dysfunction of the sterol esterifying enzyme
acyl-coenzyme a-cholesterol acyltransferase (acat), which
likely occurs slowly during lesion progression. in contrast, plant
sterols are relatively poorly esterified by acat, and so they may
cause macrophage death and plaque necrosis in an accelerated
manner. in support of this hypothesis, we show here that mac-
rophages incubated with sitosterol-containing lipoproteins
accumulate free sterols and undergo death in the absence of an
acat inhibitor. as with fc loading, sitosterol-induced macro-
phage death requires sterol trafficking to the endoplasmic retic-
ulum, and sitosterol-enriched endoplasmic reticulum mem-
branes show evidence of membrane protein dysfunction.
however, whereas fc induces caspase-dependent apoptosis
through activation of the unfolded protein response and jnk,
sitosterol-induced death is caspase-independent and involves
neither the unfolded protein response nor jnk. rather, cell
death shows signs of necroptosis and autophagy and is sup-
pressed by inhibitors of both processes. these data establish two
new concepts. first, a relatively subtle change in sterol structure
fundamentallyaltersthetypeofdeathprogramtriggeredinmac-
rophages. understanding the basis of this alteration should pro-
vide new insights into the molecular basis of death pathway sig-
naling. second, sitosterol-induced macrophage death does not
require acat dysfunction and so may occur in an accelerated
fashion.pendingfutureinvivostudies,thisconceptmayprovide
at least one mechanism for accelerated plaque necrosis and
atherothrombotic disease in patients with sitosterolemia.
plant sterols are abundant in human diets and are absorbed
with cholesterol by intestinal epithelial enterocytes in a process
involving the sterol transporter niemann-pick c1-like protein
1 (1). however, in most humans, plasma levels of intestinally
derived plant sterols are much lower than those of intestinally
derived cholesterol. the mechanism involves selective efflux of
plant sterols into the intestinal lumen by the abc2 transporters
abcg5 and abcg8 (1). mutations in these abc transporters
give rise to a condition called sitosterolemia, in which plasma
levels of plant sterols reach very high levels (2–4). of great
interest, patients with sitosterolemia have been observed to
develop premature and severe coronary artery atherothrom-
botic disease (5–9).
the mechanism of accelerated coronary artery disease in
sitosterolemic patients is unknown. one theory holds that
these subjects have increased traditional atherosclerosis risk
factors, such as elevated ldl cholesterol (10), but the correla-
tion between high ldl and coronary events in sitosterolemia is
not consistent (4). another theory suggests that sitosterol and
possibly other plant sterols have direct, pro-atherogenic effects
in the arterial wall (11, 12). in support of this theory, plant sterol
levels are found in atherosclerotic lesions or xanthomas of sub-
jects with elevated plasma sitosterol levels (13–15). however,
no clear mechanism of how lesional sitosterol might promote
atherothrombosis, the cause of coronary artery disease, has
been elucidated.
atherothrombotic vascular disease occurs in two major
stages. in the first stage, which evolves over years, atherogenic
lipoproteins are internalized by arterial wall macrophages,
leading to massive cholesteryl ester accumulation (foam cells)
(16–18). the process involves transport of lipoprotein-derived
cholesterol to the endoplasmic reticulum (er), where it is ester-
ified by acyl-coa:cholesterol acyltransferase (acat) (19, 20).
early foam cell lesions are non-occlusive and are therefore
largely asymptomatic (21, 22). in the second stage, macro-
phage-rich plaques rupture or erode, which exposes circulating
platelets to thrombogenic material in the lesions (21–23). this
process leads within minutes to acute arterial occlusion and
tissue infarction.
a key event in plaque disruption is macrophage death, lead-
ing to generation of the necrotic or lipid core (24, 25). necrotic
* this work was supported by national institutes of health grants hl75662
and hl081181 and a grant from the merck/schering-plough investigator-
initiated studies program (to i. t.). the costs of publication of this article
were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. this article must
therefore be hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 u.s.c.
section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
1 to whom correspondence should be addressed: dept. of medicine, colum-
bia university, 630 west 168th st., new york, ny 10032. tel.: 212-305-9430;
fax: 212-305-4834; e-mail: iat1@columbia.edu.
2 the abbreviations used are: abc, atp-binding cassette; acat, acyl-coa:cho-
lesterol acyltransferase; er, endoplasmic reticulum; fc, free cholesterol;
ldl, low density lipoprotein; nec-1, necrostatin-1; racl-co/so, acetyl-ldl
reconstituted with cholesteryl oleate or sitosteryl oleate; serca, sarcoplas-
mic-endoplasmic reticulum calcium atpase; tunel, transferase-mediated
dutp nick-end labeling; upr, unfolded protein response; jnk, c-jun nh2-
terminal kinase; z, benzyloxycarbonyl; fmk, fluoromethyl ketone; tricine,
n-[2-hydroxy-1,1-bis(hydroxymethyl)ethyl]glycine; mops,
4-morpho-
linepropanesulfonic acid; eif, eukaryotic initiation factor.
november 3, 2006 • volume 281 • number 44
journal of biological chemistry 33635
sitosterol-induced macrophage death
cores are thought to promote plaque disruption through release
of proteases,
inflammatory cytokines, and pro-coagulant/
thrombotic molecules as well as through imparting physical
stress on the arterial wall (23, 25–29). because late lesional mac-
rophages accumulate large amounts unesterified, or “free,”
cholesterol (fc), which is cytotoxic, one proposed inducer of
late lesional macrophage death is fc loading (20, 23, 30–40).
although the mechanism of fc accumulation is uncertain, we
have in vivo evidence that events centered on the er are
involved (37, 38). the most likely explanation is that a combi-
nation of defective cholesterol esterification by acat and
defective cholesterol efflux are involved. however, the actual
extent of acat dysfunction or fc-induced macrophage apo-
ptosis in lesions is not known.
if indeed late lesional macrophages acquire a defect in
acat-mediated esterification, this process would likely occur
gradually over a long period of time. however, plant sterols,
including sitosterol, are incompletely esterified by macrophage
acat (acat1), which may be due to a partial deficiency in
their ability to activate the enzyme (41–44). thus, if sitosterol-
containing lipoproteins were internalized by macrophages, the
accumulation of potentially cytotoxic free sterol might occur
much earlier in the course of atherosclerosis progression. this
mechanism could provide at least one explanation for the accel-
erated atherothrombosis in sitosterolemia.
to begin to test this concept, we have conducted a study to
determine whether lipoprotein-derived sitosterol is cytotoxic
in macrophages in the absence of an acat inhibitor (“acat-
competent” macrophages). our data show that such lipopro-
teinsarerobustinducersofcelldeathinacat-competentmac-
rophages and that the mechanism is fundamentally different
from that caused by free cholesterol. whereas fc triggers
caspase-dependent apoptosis through activation of a pro-apo-
ptotic branch of the er stress pathway known as the unfolded
protein response (upr) (37, 38), sitosterol-induced death
involves neither caspases nor the upr but rather has properties
in common with a death process recently described as “necrop-
tosis” (45). these findings not only suggest a possible mecha-
nism of plant sterol-induced atherothrombotic disease but also
reveal how a subtle change in sterol structure can have a dra-
matic effect on cell death pathways.
experimental procedures
materials—cell culture media and reagents were from
invitrogen. hplc grade organic solvents were from fisher
scientific. ldl (d 1.020–1.063 g/ml) was isolated from fresh
human plasma by preparative ultracentrifugation as previ-
ously described (46). acetyl-ldl was prepared by reaction
of ldl with acetic anhydride (47). sitosterol and cholesteryl
oleate, 3-methyladenine, and pepstatin a were from sigma.
compound 58035 (3-[decyldimethylsilyl]-n-(2-(4-methyl-
phenyl)-1-phenylethyl)propanamide), an inhibitor of acat,
was generously provided by dr. john heider, formerly of san-
doz, inc. (east hanover, nj) (48). a stock solution of 10 mg/ml
was prepared in dimethyl sulfoxide and stored at ⫺20 °c.
u18666a (3-␤-[2-diethylaminoethoxy]androst-5-en-17-one
hydrochloride) and necrostatin-1 (methylthiohydantoin-dl-
tryptophan) were from biomol research laboratories, inc.
(plymouth meeting, pa). sp600125 (anthra[1,9-cd]pyrazol-
6(2h)-one) was from biosource international,
inc., and
z-devd-fmk was from r&d systems, inc. antibodies against
p38, phospho-p38, phospho-eif-2␣, cleaved caspase-3, and
cleaved caspase-9 were from cell signaling technology. anti-
bodies against chop (gadd153), ␤-actin, rabbit anti-fasl
igg (c-178), and non-immune rabbit igg were from santa
cruz biotechnologies, inc. anti-xbp-1 antibody was a gift from
dr. david ron (new york university), and anti-lc3 antibody
was kindly provided by dr. takahiro kamimoto (national
institute of genetics, mishima, japan).
mice—female mice, 8–10 weeks of age, were used in this
study. c57bl6/j mice were from jackson laboratories.
chop⫺/⫺ mice on the c57bl/6 background were from drs.
david ron (new york university) and robert burke (columbia
university). macrophage-specific p38-deficient mice on the
c57bl/6 background were created as previously described (49).
eliciting, culturing, and incubations of mouse peritoneal
macrophage—peritoneal macrophages were elicited by intrap-
eritoneal injection of methyl-bovine serum albumin in mice
previously immunized with this antigen (50, 51). the cells were
cultured in dulbecco’s modified eagle’s medium supplemented
with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum, 100 units/ml
penicillin/streptomycin, and 20% l-cell-conditioned medium
for 24–48 h to reach confluence.
synthesis of sitosteryl oleate—sitosterol (100 mg, 0.24
mmol) was dissolved in benzene (10 ml). to this solution,
oleic anhydride (158 mg, 0.29 mmol) and 4-(dimeth-
ylamino)pyridine (5 mg, catalytic amount) were added. the
reaction mixture was stirred overnight in the dark at room tem-
perature and then washed twice with 5 ml of 1 n hcl and three
times with 5 ml of saturated nahco3 solution. the organic
phase was dried with anhydrous na2so4 and filtered. the sol-
vent was removed by evaporation under reduced pressure to
provide crude product. purification of the crude product by
silica gel chromatography (petroleum ether/ch2cl2, 10:1) gave
sitosteryl oleate as a sticky oil in 95% yield. the structure of the
product was confirmed by nmr.
reconstitution of acetyl-ldl—acetyl-ldl was reconsti-
tuted with defined neutral lipids as described (52). briefly, 1.9
mg of acetyl-ldl and 25 mg of potato starch were frozen and
lyophilized in a 15-ml glass tube. the endogenous core lipids
were then extracted three times with 5 ml of heptane, and then
6 mg of the indicated steryl oleate (dissolved in 200 ␮l of hep-
tane) were added to the tube. this mixture was then dried, and
the sample was resuspended in 1 ml of 10 mm tricine (ph 8.4).
this suspension was incubated for 10–24 h. the solubilized
reconstituted lipoprotein was separated from the bulk of the
starch and excess lipid by low-speed centrifugation (2,000 ⫻ g).
the specimen was further clarified by two additional centrifu-
gations at 10,000 ⫻ g for 10 min and stored under argon at 4 °c.
aliquots were assayed for protein concentration by the method
of lowry et al. (53).
lipid mass analysis—cell monolayers were extracted twice
with hexane/isopropyl alcohol (3:2, v/v), and the lipid extracts
were assayed for free and total sterol mass by gas-liquid chro-
matography as described (54). 5␣-cholestane served as an
internal standard to correct for losses during the extraction
33636 journal of biological chemistry
volume 281 • number 44 • november 3, 2006
procedure. the cell monolayers remaining after lipid extraction
were dissolved in 0.1 n naoh, and aliquots were assayed for
protein concentration by the method of lowry (53).
measurements of ca2⫹-dependent atpase activity—sarco-
plasmic-endoplasmic reticulum calcium-dependent atpase
(serca) activity in control or sterol-enriched microsomal
membranes was measured as previously described (55). briefly,
100 ␮g of microsomal membranes isolated from wild type or
serca2b-overexpressing hek293 cells were incubated with
various amounts of sterols in complex with methyl-␤-cyclodex-
trin at 25 °c for 30 min. the microsomes were recovered by
centrifugation, and serca atpase activity was measured
using an enzyme-coupled spectrophotometric assay in which
hydrolysis of atp is coupled to the oxidation of nadh (55).
the depletion of nadh was then detected by a decrease in
absorption at 340 nm using a spectra max 190 fluorospectrom-
eter (molecular devices) maintained at 30 °c. the assay buffer
contained 120 mm kcl, 2 mm mgcl2, 1 mm atp, 1.5 mm phos-
phoenolpyruvate, 1 mm dithiothreitol, 0.45 mm cacl2, 0.5 mm
egta, 25 mm mops/koh, 0.32 mm nadh, 5 units/ml pyru-
vate kinase, 10 units/ml lactate dehydrogenase, and 2 ␮m of the
calcium ionophore a23187. the ph was adjusted to 7.0 with
koh before addition of the enzymes, and the free ca2⫹ con-
centration in the solution was determined to be ⬃3 ␮m. the
reaction was started by adding 10 ␮g of the membranes to 200
␮l of the assay buffer in wells of a 96-well uv-visible transpar-
ent bottom plate, followed by rapid mixing. the absorption at
340 nm was recorded at 30-s intervals for 30 min using the
softmax pro 3.0 program.
annexin v-propidium iodide staining—annexin v staining
was performed using the vybrant apoptosis assay kit 2
(molecular probes). at the end of incubation, cells were gently
washed twice with phosphate-buffered saline, and then incu-
bated in 100 ␮l of annexin-binding buffer (25 mm hepes, 140
mm nacl, 1 mm edta, ph 7.4, 0.1% bovine serum albumin)
containing 5 ␮l of alexa fluor 488 annexin v, and 1 ␮l of 100
␮g/ml propidium iodide for 15 min at room temperature. cells
were immediately viewed using an olympus ix-70 inverted flu-
orescence microscope equipped with filters appropriate for flu-
orescein and rhodamine. for quantification, three fields of cells
for each condition (⬃1500 cells) were counted.
sitosterol-induced macrophage death
figure 1. macrophages incubated with racldl-sitosteryl oleate in the
absence of an acat inhibitor accumulate large amounts of free sitoste-
rol. macrophages were incubated for 15 h with medium alone (control) or
with medium containing 10 ␮g/ml 58035 (acat inhibitor), 100 ␮g/ml
racldl-cholesteryl oleate (racl-co) ⫾ 58035, or 100 ␮g/ml racldl-sitosteryl
oleate (racl-so) ⫾ 58035. then cells were then rinsed,
incubated with
medium alone for 30 min, and rinsed again. cellular lipids were extracted and
assayed for free cholesterol and free sitosterol, and the lipid-extracted cell
residues were assayed for protein. the data are displayed as micrograms of
free cholesterol (solid bars) or sitosterol (gray bars) per ␮g of cell protein.
annexin assay. apoptosis is defined as those cells that stain with
the fluorescein-labeled anti-digoxigenin-dntp antibody.
mitotracker red staining—macrophages on coverslips were
incubated in media containing 300 nm mitotracker red
(molecular probes) for 30 min at 37 °c. the cells were washed
three times with phosphate-buffered saline, fixed with 2%
paraformaldehyde for 15 min at room temperature, and viewed
by fluorescence microscopy. the fluorescent images were col-
lected using a zeiss lsm 510 confocal microscope.
immunoblotting—whole cell
lysates were prepared by
homogenizing the cells into 1⫻ sample loading buffer from
bio-rad. nuclear extracts were prepared using the nuclear
extraction kit from panomics, inc. cell extracts were electro-
phoresed on 4–20% gradient sds-page gels and transferred
to 0.45-␮m nitrocellulose membranes. for caspase-3 and
caspase-9 immunoblots, 15 and 12.5% sds-page gels and
0.2-␮m nitrocellulose membranes were used. the membrane
was blocked in tris-buffered saline, 0.1% tween 20 (tbst)
containing 5% (w/v) nonfat milk at room temperature for 1 h,
then incubated with the primary antibody in tbst containing
5% (w/v) nonfat milk or 5% bovine serum albumin at 4 °c over-
night, followed by incubation with the appropriate secondary
antibody coupled to horseradish peroxidase. proteins were
detected by ecl chemiluminescence (pierce).
statistics—data are presented as mean ⫾ s.e. of triplicate
experiments unless stated otherwise. absent error bars in
the bar graphs signify s.e. values smaller than the graphic
symbols.
hoechst staining—cells were washed with phosphate-buff-
ered saline 3 times, incubated with 100 ng/ml hoechst 33258
for 30 min at room temperature, and then washed with phos-
phate-buffered saline. cells were viewed by fluorescence
microscopy using a uv filter.
tunel assay—macrophages were fixed with 1% paraform-
aldehyde in phosphate-buffered saline (ph 7.4) for 10 min at
room temperature, and then post-fixed in pre-cooled ethanol/
acetic acid (2:1) for 5 min at ⫺20 °c. the cells were then stained
using apoptag fluorescein in situ apoptosis detection kit
(chemicon international). in this assay, the incorporated
dntp is modified by digoxigenin, which in turn is recognized
by a fluorescein-labeled antibody. a propidium iodide counter-
stain, which is taken up by fixed cells, was used to stain all of the
cells on the dish. the fluorescence microscopy and quantifica-
tion procedures were similar to that described above for the
november 3, 2006 • volume 281 • number 44
journal of biological chemistry 33637
sitasteroi-induced macrophage death
control 58035
racl-co + 58035
33638
racl-co
racl-co + 58035
w vollme 281 ~numbe7 /-/-~november 3, 2006
racl-so
racl-co 4* 58035
mm} pspuowmou
gm; ‘9 qmw no 3331103 unoj umﬂmg m
results
incubation of macrophages with sitosteryl ester-containing
lipoproteins leads to free sitosterol accumulation in the
absence of an acat inhibitor—when lipoprotein-cholesterol
is delivered to macrophages, the cholesterol is efficiently ester-
ified by the er enzyme acat, thus preventing fc accumula-
tion and fc-induced macrophage death (20, 56, 57). thus,
lipoprotein-cholesterol accumulation induces death only when
acat-mediated esterification is inhibited in vitro or becomes
dysfunctional in vivo, which we propose occurs in a gradual
manner during the course of advanced atherosclerosis (20).
previous work from our group and others has shown that a
number of plant sterols, including sitosterol, is less efficiently
esterified by acat than cholesterol (41–44). if so, free sitoste-
rol
levels should accumulate in macrophages even in the
absence of an acat inhibitor. to test this idea using a physi-
ologic delivery system, we synthesized the oleate ester of sito-
sterol and packaged it in reconstituted acetyl-ldl lipoprotein
particles (racl-so). we then compared free sterol accumula-
tion in control and acat-inhibited macrophages incubated
with these particles, as well as acetyl-ldl reconstituted with
cholesteryl oleate (racl-co). as expected, excess fc accumu-
lated only when racl-co was incubated with acat-inhibited
macrophages (fig. 1, first four bars). in striking contrast, free
sitosterolaccumulatedwhenracl-sowasincubatedwithmac-
rophages in the absence of an acat inhibitor (fig. 1, last two
bars). as predicted from the recent findings of rudel and col-
leagues (44) that acat1, the predominant form of acat in
macrophages, shows partial activity with sitosterol, some sito-
sterol esterification did occur in the macrophages without the
acat inhibitor (data not shown). however, the proportion of
sitosterol esterified by acat was substantially less than that of
cholesterol: 42.8% sitosterol esterified versus 71.6% cholesterol
esterified at similar levels of cellular sterol loading. thus, mac-
rophages accumulate large amounts of free sitosterol when
exposed to sitosterol-containing lipoproteins even in the
absence of an acat inhibitor.
sitosterol-containing lipoproteins are potent inducers of cell
death in acat-competent macrophages—the data in fig. 1,
previous work demonstrating the cytotoxicity of free choles-
terol, and the structural similarity between sitosterol and cho-
lesterol provide the basis for our hypothesis that sitosterol-con-
taining lipoproteins would be potent inducers of macrophage
death even in the absence of an acat inhibitor. to directly test
this hypothesis, macrophages were incubated with the afore-
mentioned reconstituted lipoproteins in the absence or pres-
ence of an acat inhibitor. as shown in fig. 2 using three
different cell death assays: annexin v-propidium iodide stain-
ing, hoechst nuclear staining, and tunel assay, racl-co
induced macrophage death only in the presence of an acat
inhibitor, which is consistent with previous data (57, 58). in
sitosterol-induced macrophage death
figure 3. racldl-sitosteryl oleate is a potent inducer of macrophage
death in the absence of an acat inhibitor: quantitative data. a, macro-
phages from the experiment described in the legend to fig. 2a were quanti-
fied as percentage of total cells that showed annexin v staining. b, macro-
phages were incubated for 71 h with medium alone or medium containing
100 ␮g/ml racldl (racl) containing the indicated percentages of cholesteryl
oleate (co) and sitosteryl oleate (so). the cells were assayed for externalized
phosphatidylserine by fluorescent annexin v staining and quantified as in
panel a.
contrast, racl-so was a potent inducer of macrophage death
even in the absence of an acat inhibitor. quantitative
annexin v data from a repeat experiment with additional con-
trols are displayed in fig. 3a. consistent with the data in fig. 2,
racl-so was a relatively potent inducer of macrophage death,
and this effect was not dependent on acat inhibition.
whereas the percent racl-so-induced macrophage death var-
ied from experiment
(range ⬃10–35%),
to experiment
figure 2. racldl-sitosteryl oleate is a potent inducer of macrophage death in the absence of an acat inhibitor: microscopy images. macrophages
were incubated for 26 h with medium alone (control) or with medium containing 10 ␮g/ml 58035 (acat inhibitor), 100 ␮g/ml racldl-cholesteryl oleate
(racl-co) ⫾ 58035, or 100 ␮g/ml racldl-sitosteryl oleate (racl-so) ⫾ 58035. in a, the cells were stained with fluorescent annexin v (green) and propidium
iodide (red) and then viewed by fluorescence (top images) and phase (bottom images) microscopy. in b, cells from the indicated conditions were stained with
hoechst nuclear stain and viewed by fluorescence microscopy. in c, cells from the indicated conditions were stained by the tunel method (green) and with a
nuclear counterstain (orange). bar, 10 ␮m.
november 3, 2006 • volume 281 • number 44
journal of biological chemistry 33639
sitosterol-induced macrophage death
racl-so always caused more death than racl-co ⫹ 58035
whenever the two conditions were compared directly in the
same experiment.
we next determined whether racldl containing the pro-
portion of sitosterol that can be seen in patients with sitoster-
olemia is able to cause apoptosis in the absence of an acat
inhibitor. in a recent study from the multicenter sitosterolemia
study group by salen et al. (59), 37 patients with sitosterolemia
had an average of ⬃34% plant sterols and 66% cholesterol in
their ldl, and approximately two-thirds of these plant sterols
were sitosterol (i.e. ⬃22% sitosterol in ldl). as shown in fig.
3b, significant macrophage death occurred when the lipopro-
tein contained as little as 20% sitosteryl oleate.
sitosterol-induced macrophage death requires sterol traf-
ficking to the er, and sitosterol enrichment of er membranes
inhibits serca activity—for fc loading to induce macro-
phage death, cholesterol trafficking to the er is absolutely nec-
essary (38). to test this point with sitosterol-induced death,
macrophages were incubated with racl-so in the absence or
presence of the cholesterol trafficking inhibitor, u18666a. in a
pilot experiment (not displayed), we showed that u18666a was
an effective inhibitor of sitosterol trafficking to the er. as
shown in fig. 4a, u18666a was a potent inhibitor of sitosterol-
induced macrophage death. similar results were obtained when
sterol trafficking was inhibited by the heterozygous niemann-
pick c1 mutation (data not shown; cf. ref. 37). thus, lipopro-
tein-derived sitosterol,
like lipoprotein-derived cholesterol,
requires trafficking to the er to induce death.
our previous work provided evidence that free cholesterol
exerts it cytotoxicity at least in part by altering the structure and
function of er membranes, which normally have a low choles-
terol:phospholipid ratio (38, 55). in particular, we showed that
an integral membrane er enzyme involved in upr activation,
serca, was inhibited when membranes containing this
enzyme were enriched with cholesterol in vitro (55). enzyme
inhibition occurred at levels of cholesterol that corresponded to
cholesterol-induced er membrane-phase transition and to
cholesterol enrichment of the er in fc-loaded macrophages
(55). to determine whether sitosterol enrichment of er mem-
branes was also able to inhibit serca activity, serca2b-con-
taining membranes were assayed in the absence of sterol
enrichment or after enrichment with cholesterol or sitosterol.
as shown in fig. 4b, addition of 1.5 ␮g of sitosterol inhibited
serca activity, albeit somewhat less than 1.5 ␮g of cholesterol.
at 15 ␮g of sterols, sitosterol inhibited serca to the same
degree as cholesterol. these data are consistent with prior work
(60–65) showing that sitosterol can affect the structure of bio-
logical membranes in a manner similar, although not identical,
to cholesterol.
sitosterol-induced macrophage death does not depend
upon the upr effector chop or jnk but requires p38 map
kinase—fc trafficking to the er triggers the er stress pathway
known as the upr (38). importantly, one of the upr effectors
induced by fc loading, chop (gadd153), is necessary for the
full apoptotic response (38). given the similar effects of choles-
terol and sitosterol on serca activity and the requirement for
sitosterol trafficking to the er (above), we predicted that the
upr would be activated by sitosterol loading and involved in
figure 4. racldl-sitosteryl oleate-induced macrophage death is
blocked by u18666a, an inhibitor of sterol trafficking to the er, and
sitosterol, like cholesterol, inhibits serca2b activity when added to
serca2b-containing microsomes. a, macrophages were incubated for
23 h with medium alone (control) or with medium containing 1 ␮m
u18666a, 100 ␮g/ml racldl-sitosteryl oleate (racl-so), or with both
racldl-sitosteryl oleate ⫹ u18666a. the cells were assayed for external-
ized phosphatidylserine by fluorescent annexin v staining and quantified
as described in the legend to fig. 3. b, microsomal membranes (100 ␮g of
protein) from serca2b-transfected hek293 cells were incubated with
either 1.5 or 15 ␮g of cholesterol or sitosterol complexed with methyl-␤-
cyclodextrin (cd). controls were serca2b-containing membranes incu-
bated with no added sterols and microsomes from non-transfected con-
trols. the membranes were re-isolated by centrifugation and assayed for
calcium-dependent atpase activity, as measured by a decrease in absorp-
tion at 340 nm, indicative of consumption of nadh in this enzyme-cou-
pled assay. in this assay, increasing serca activity is associated with lower
od340.
in additional controls, not shown here, atpase activity was
dependent on calcium, inhibited by the serca inhibitor thapsigargin, and
not affected by incubation with methyl-␤-cyclodextrin alone.
33640 journal of biological chemistry
volume 281 • number 44 • november 3, 2006
sitosterol-induced macrophage death
phosphorylation of eif2␣, were also
not found with sitosterol
loading
(fig. 5b). most importantly, defi-
ciency of chop, which blocks fc-
induced apoptosis (38), did not
block sitosterol-induced macro-
phage death (fig. 5c). these sur-
prising data indicate that sitosterol-
induced macrophage death does not
involve upr activation.
in fc-loaded macrophages, p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase is
activated, which is necessary for
upr induction and upr-induced
macrophage death (49, 51). despite
the lack of a role for the upr in sito-
sterol-induced death, we deter-
mined whether p38 was activated by
sitosterol loading. as shown in fig.
6a, sitosterol
loading of macro-
phages was an extremely potent
inducer of p38 phosphorylation.
moreover, we found that p38 played
a major role in sitosterol-induced
death, as demonstrated by the
marked inhibition of death in mac-
rophages lacking p38 (fig. 6b). in
contrast, jnk, another mitogen-ac-
tivated protein kinase that is criti-
callyinvolvedinfc-inducedmacro-
phage death (49) and that
is
activated by sitosterol
loading of
macrophages (data not shown), was
not involved in sitosterol-induced
death (fig. 6c). in fc-loaded mac-
rophages, p38 activation requires
fc trafficking to the er (51). a sim-
ilar result with sitosterol could
explain the importance of sitosterol
trafficking to the er in macrophage
death. however, sitosterol-induced
p38 phosphorylation was com-
pletely intact in the presence of
the
inhibitor,
u18666a (fig. 6d). these data indi-
cate the critical role of p38 in sitos-
terol-induced macrophage death
and further highlight how the
mechanism differs
from fc-in-
duced macrophage death. more-
over, the data with u18666a sug-
gest
two independent pathways are necessary for
sitosterol-induced death: one involving sitosterol trafficking to
the er and the other involving p38.
sitosterol-induced macrophage death does not involve acti-
vation of caspases-3 and -9, fas ligand, or loss of mitochon-
drial membrane potential—fc-induced macrophage death
requires both the fas and mitochondrial/caspase-9 pathways of
that
sterol
trafficking
figure 5. chop is not involved in racldl-sitosteryl oleate-induced macrophage death. a, macrophages
were incubated for the indicated times with medium alone or with medium containing 100 ␮g/ml racldl-
cholesteryl oleate (racl-co) ⫾ 58035 or 100 ␮g/ml racldl-sitosteryl oleate (racl-so) ⫾ 58035. cell extracts
were probed for chop and actin by immunoblotting. the doublet bands migrating above chop in the
racldl-so lane at 9 h and control lane at 12 h were not consistently observed in repeat experiments. b,
macrophages were incubated with medium alone or with medium containing 100 ␮g/ml racldl-cholesteryl
oleate (racl-co) ⫾ 58035 or 100 ␮g/ml racldl-sitosteryl oleate (racl-so). cell extracts were probed for xbp-1,
phosphorylated eif2␣ (p-eif2␣), and actin by immunoblotting. the incubation time was 9 h for the xbp-1
experiment and 5 h for the eif2␣experiment. c, macrophages from chop⫹/⫹ or chop⫺/⫺ mice were incubated
for 24 h with medium alone (control) or with medium containing 100 ␮g/ml racldl-sitosteryl oleate (racl-so)
or with medium containing 100 ␮g/ml racldl-cholesteryl oleate (racl-co) ⫹ 58035. the cells were assayed for
externalized phosphatidylserine by fluorescent annexin v staining and quantified as described in the legend to
fig. 3.
sitosterol-induced macrophage death. to test this prediction,
we assayed chop in macrophages loaded with fc or sitosterol.
as expected, fc loading induced chop, but, surprisingly, sito-
sterol loading of macrophages did not induce chop at the time
points tested (fig. 5a) and only minimally induced chop at
17 h of incubation (not shown). moreover, two other makers of
upr activation induced by fc loading, expression of xbp-1 and
november 3, 2006 • volume 281 • number 44
journal of biological chemistry 33641
sitosterol-induced macrophage death
figure 6. p38 is activated by racldl-sitosteryl oleate and is necessary for racldl-sitosteryl oleate-induced macrophage death. a, macrophages were
incubated for 12 h with medium alone or with medium containing 100 ␮g/ml racldl-cholesteryl oleate (racl-co) ⫾ 58035, or 100 ␮g/ml racldl-sitosteryl
oleate (racl-so) ⫾ 58035. cell extracts were probed by immunoblotting for phosphorylated (p) and total p38. b, wild-type (p38⫹/⫹) or p38-deficient ( p38⫺/⫺)
macrophages were incubated for 17 h with medium alone (control ) or with medium containing 100 ␮g/ml racldl-sitosteryl oleate (racl-so). the cells
were assayed for externalized phosphatidylserine by fluorescent annexin v staining and quantified as described in the legend to fig. 3. shown below the
graph are total p38 and actin immunoblots of samples from these macrophages. consistent with our previous data (49), apoptosis induced by
racldl-cholesteryl oleate ⫹ 58035 was also lower in the p38-deficient macrophages (data not shown). c, macrophages were incubated for 23 h with
medium alone (control ) or with medium containing 100 ␮g/ml racldl-cholesteryl oleate (racl-co) ⫹ 58035 ⫾ 20 ␮m sp600125 or 100 ␮g/ml racldl-
sitosteryl oleate (racl-so) ⫾ 20 ␮m sp600125. the cells were assayed for externalized phosphatidylserine by fluorescent annexin v staining and
quantified as described in the legend to fig. 3. as reported previously, sp600125 alone has no effect on cell viability (49). d, macrophages were
incubated for 7 h with medium alone or with medium containing 100 ␮g/ml racldl-cholesteryl oleate (racl-co) ⫾ 1 ␮m u18666a. cell extracts were
probed by immunoblotting for phosphorylated and total p38.
apoptosis, leading to activation of the downstream apoptosis
effector caspase-3 (58, 66). to test these pathways in sitosterol-
induced macrophage death, macrophages incubated with
racl-co ⫹ 58035 (fc loading) were compared with those
incubated with racl-so for caspase-9 and caspase-3 activa-
tion. as expected, both caspases were activated (cleaved) in
fc-loaded macrophages, but neither were activated by sitoste-
rol loading (figs. 7, a and b). most importantly, the caspase-3
inhibitor z-devd-fmk, which inhibits fc-induced apoptosis,
did not inhibit sitosterol-induced apoptosis (fig. 7c). we next
examined the fas and mitochondrial pathways in more detail.
although blocking fas ligand with an antibody inhibits ⬃60–
70% of the fc-induced apoptosis (58), the same antibody did
not block sitosterol-induced apoptosis (fig. 7d). similarly, fc
loading decreases the mitochondrial membrane potential, con-
sistent with fc-induced cytochrome c release and caspase-9
activation (66). using uptake of mitotracker red as an indicator
of mitochondrial membrane potential, we found that loading
macrophages with sitosterol did not substantially decrease
mitochondrial uptake of the dye under conditions in which fc
33642 journal of biological chemistry
volume 281 • number 44 • november 3, 2006
sitosterol-induced macrophage death
figure 7. racldl-sitosteryl oleate-induced macrophage death does not involve activation of caspases-9 and -3, fas ligand, or loss of mitochondrial
membrane potential. a, macrophages were incubated for 16 h with medium alone or with medium containing 100 ␮g/ml racldl-cholesteryl oleate
(racl-co) ⫾ 58035, or 100 ␮g/ml racldl-sitosteryl oleate (racl-so). cell extracts were probed for cleaved caspase-9 and actin by immunoblotting. b, macro-
phages were incubated for 18 h with medium alone or with medium containing 100 ␮g/ml racldl-cholesteryl oleate (racl-co) ⫾ 58035, or 100 ␮g/ml
racldl-sitosteryl oleate (racl-so). another set of macrophages was incubated with 50 nm staurosporine as an additional positive control. cell extracts were
probed for cleaved caspase-3 by immunoblotting. c, macrophages were incubated for 18 h with medium alone (control ) or with medium containing 100 ␮g/ml
racldl-cholesteryl oleate (racl-co) ⫹ 58035 ⫾ 20 ␮m z-devd-fmk or 100 ␮g/ml racldl-sitosteryl oleate (racl-so) ⫾ 20 ␮m z-devd-fmk. the cells were
assayed for tunel staining and quantified. d, macrophages were incubated for 24 h with medium alone (control ) or with medium containing 100 ␮g/ml
racldl-sitosteryl oleate (racl-so) ⫾ 25 ␮g/ml non-immune rabbit igg (ni-igg) or rabbit anti-fasl igg (␣fasl igg). a similar experiment was conducted with
racldl-cholesteryl oleate (racl-co) ⫹ 58035 (right graph). the cells were assayed for externalized phosphatidylserine by fluorescent annexin v staining and
quantified as described in the legend to fig. 3. e, macrophages were incubated for 15 h with medium alone (control ) or with medium containing 100 ␮g/ml
racldl-cholesteryl oleate (racl-co) ⫾ 58035, or 100 ␮g/ml racldl-sitosteryl oleate (racl-so). the cells were then stained with mitotracker red and viewed by
confocal microscopy. bar, 5 ␮m.
loading caused a marked decrease (fig. 7e). together, these
data clearly indicate that sitosterol-induced macrophage death,
in stark contrast to fc loading-induced macrophage death,
does not
involve classic fas, mitochondrial, or caspase
pathways.
vacuoles—a recent study has shown that certain types of
caspase-independent cell death with features of necrosis can be
inhibited by methylthiohydantoin-dl-tryptophan (necrosta-
tin-1 or nec-1) (45). examples include cultured cells treated
with the combination of an apoptosis inducer plus a caspase
inhibitor, cells treated with an activator of receptor-interacting
protein, and neurons in vivo after ischemic brain injury (45).
sitosterol-induced macrophage death is
inhibited by
necrostatin-1 and leads to the accumulation of autophagic
november 3, 2006 • volume 281 • number 44
journal of biological chemistry 33643
sitasteroi-induced macrophage death
racl-so + nec-1
18 b
16
ha
n §
.n
macrophage beam
(56 0' total cells)
raclso racl-so
. mc-1
control noc-i
   
—-_
      
control racl-co
.58035
band mlative to d—actin
   
inle nsixy of lc
racl£o
.sms
conlrnl muse
33644
racl-co racl-co
0 58035 0 50035
. noc-1
lca—ii
bach"
12
10
..
‘3;
n53
.u
5,-
”a
:2
5‘?"
es
“v
5 4
15
12
macrophage death
(7.. onotal cells)
cunlvol rall-sd mlso
oa-ma
(mum
ccntm| racl»so racl-so
‘wpslaiiiia
(mini)
vollmez81~numbe7 “november 3, 2006
mg ‘9 qmw no 3331103 unoj umﬂmg m m aqumm 'duq tum} pzpuolumou
the death-inhibiting effect of nec-1 was highly specific for this
form of death, which the authors termed necroptosis (45).
given the fact that caspases are not activated during sitosterol-
induced death, we considered that a process similar to necrop-
tosis may be involved. as shown by the images and quantified
data in fig. 8, a and b, nec-1 almost completely inhibited sitos-
terol-induced macrophage death. in contrast, nec-1 did not
inhibit fc-induced macrophage apoptosis (fig. 8b). consistent
with the lack of an effect of nec-1 on fc-induced apoptosis, we
showed that nec-1 was not an inhibitor of sterol trafficking to
the er (data not shown). moreover, nec-1 did not block acti-
vation of p38 by sitosterol (data not shown). therefore,
nec-1 most likely inhibits sitosterol-induced death down-
stream of sterol-trafficking to the er and p38 activation (see
“discussion”).
the aforementioned study with caspase-inhibited cells
showed that autophagy was associated with necroptosis (45).
to begin to explore the involvement of autophagy in sitosterol-
induced macrophage death, control macrophages and those
exposed to either fc-loading conditions or lipoprotein-sitos-
terol were immunoblotted for the autophagy marker, lc3-ii
(67). as shown in fig. 8c, there was a clear increase in lc3-ii in
macrophages incubated with lipoprotein-sitosterol compared
with control or fc-loaded macrophages. although autophagy
was downstream of cell death in the necroptosis study referred
to above (45), we found that two autophagy inhibitors,
3-methyladenine and the cathepsin d inhibitor pepstatin a (68,
69), partially inhibited sitosterol-induced macrophage death
(fig. 8, d and e). neither compound blocked fc-induced mac-
rophage apoptosis (data not shown). thus, sitosterol-induced
macrophage death is associated with both necroptosis and
autophagy in a causative manner, which remarkably distin-
guishes death by this sterol from death by cholesterol.
discussion
the findings in this study have revealed two new concepts
that have potential implications for both pathophysiology and
fundamental aspects of cellular death signaling (fig. 9). first,
incubation of macrophages with lipoproteins whose steryl
esters are composed of as little as one-fifth sitosteryl ester leads
to macrophage death even when acat activity is not inhibited.
because free sterol-induced macrophage death likely contrib-
utes to necrotic core formation in vulnerable atherosclerotic
plaques (29), this finding may provide at least one mechanism
for accelerated atherothrombosis in patients with very high lev-
els of plant sterols. second, whereas fc induces macrophage
death by a pathway dependent on the upr, jnk activation, and
sitosterol-induced macrophage death
caspases, sitosterol-induced death involves none of these fac-
tors. rather, sitosterol-induced death has features similar to
those of a caspase-independent cell death process referred to as
necroptosis: marked suppression by necrostatin-1 and evi-
dence of autophagy (45). moreover, in this system, there is evi-
dence that autophagy itself partially contributes to the death
process. thus, the addition of one extra ␤-ethyl group on c-24
of the sterol side chain fundamentally changes the mechanism
of sterol-induced death signaling.
regarding the first concept, the association between elevated
plant sterols and accelerated atherothrombosis has been the
subject of recent interest. whereas it appears clear that prema-
ture coronary artery disease occurs in patients with sitosterol-
emia in a manner that cannot always be explained by other risk
factors (5–9), a mechanism is lacking. in terms of macrophage
biology, nguyen et al. (11) showed that sitosterol suppressed
hydroxymethylglutaryl-coa reductase activity less than cho-
lesterol in human monocyte-derived macrophages, but how
this feature would promote atherogenesis is not clear. awad et
al. (70) found that phytosterols decreased the release of the
prostaglandins e2 and i2 from a murine macrophage cell line,
but the net effect of these effects on specific atherogenic pro-
cesses was not reported. other cells might also explain the
potential atherogenicity of high plant sterol levels. for example,
boberg et al. (12) found that sitosterol was cytotoxic to cultures
of human umbilical vein endothelial cells. the mechanism of
cytotoxicity in this study was not reported. we suggest an alter-
native mechanism: the accumulation of sitosterol in advanced
lesional macrophages leads to cell death in an accelerated man-
ner, because the delay associated with acat becoming dys-
functional would not be needed. accelerated macrophage
death, in the face of relatively inefficient phagocytic clearance
of dead cells (ref. 29, and see below), would lead to faster pro-
gression to plaque necrosis, plaque disruption, and thrombo-
occlusive vascular events. this hypothesis is based on the find-
ings here together with previous work showing that (a) lesional
necrosis consists of dead macrophages (24, 25, 27); (b) a genetic
alteration in mice that decreased advanced lesional macro-
phage death in vivo decreased plaque necrosis (37); (c) necrotic
areas in plaques likely promote plaque disruption (23, 26, 28,
29); and (d) large areas of necrosis characterize the coronary
artery plaques of sitosterolemic patients (5–9).
it should be noted that the concept of accelerated macro-
phage death by sitosterol raises, at least in theory, the possi-
bility of a very different scenario. recent studies have shown
that macrophage apoptosis in early atherosclerotic lesions,
figure 8. racldl-sitosteryl oleate-induced macrophage death is inhibited by necrostatin-1 and has characteristics of autophagy. a, macrophages
were incubated for 23 h with medium alone (control ) or with medium containing 100 ␮g/ml racldl-sitosteryl oleate (racl-so) ⫾ 30 ␮m necrostatin-1 (nec-1).
the cells were assayed for externalized phosphatidylserine by fluorescent annexin v staining and quantified as described in the legend to fig. 3. bar, 10 ␮m. b,
macrophages were incubated for 18 h with medium alone (control ), 30 ␮m necrostatin-1 (nec-1) alone, racldl-sitosteryl oleate (racl-so) ⫾ 30 ␮m necrosta-
tin-1, or racldl-cholesteryl oleate (racl-so) ⫾ 30 ␮m necrostatin-1. the cells were assayed for externalized phosphatidylserine by fluorescent annexin v
staining and quantified as described in the legend to fig. 3. c, macrophages were incubated for 13 h with medium alone (control ) or with medium containing
100 ␮g/ml racldl-cholesteryl oleate (racl-co) ⫹ 58035 or 100 ␮g/ml racldl-sitosteryl oleate (racl-so). cell extracts in triplicate were immunoblotted using
antibodies against lc3-ii and actin. the densitometry data for lc3-ii relative to ␤-actin are quantified in the graph. d, macrophages were incubated for 31 h with
medium alone (control ) or with medium containing 100 ␮g/ml racldl-sitosteryl oleate (racl-so) ⫾ 500 ␮m 3-methyladenine (3-ma). the cells were assayed for
externalized phosphatidylserine by fluorescent annexin v staining and quantified as described in the legend to fig. 3. e, macrophages were incubated for 22 h
with medium alone (control ) or with medium containing 100 ␮g/ml racldl-sitosteryl oleate (racl-so) ⫾ 1 ␮m pepstatin a. the cells were assayed for
externalized phosphatidylserine by fluorescent annexin v staining and quantified as described in the legend to fig. 3.
november 3, 2006 • volume 281 • number 44
journal of biological chemistry 33645
sitosterol-induced macrophage death
morphisms in abcg5/g8 or secondary to high dietary plant
sterol consumption, have plant sterol plasma levels that are
relatively elevated but substantially less than that seen in
patients with sitosterolemia (71). whereas some reports
have suggested that these individuals have increased risk for
heart disease (72–76), other studies have suggested other-
wise (10, 77). indeed, dietary plant sterol supplements in
normal individuals can lower plasma ldl by blocking intes-
tinal cholesterol absorption and may be atheroprotective
(78). the mechanism explored herein, in which lipoproteins
with a sitosteryl ester:cholesteryl ester ratio in the ⬃20%
range is needed to induce death in acat-competent mac-
rophages, would be most applicable to individuals with very
high levels of sitosterol.
figure 9. summary scheme of how lipoprotein-derived cholesterol and sitosterol trigger different death pathways in macrophages. see text for
details. in the right panel, “x” refers to a non-chop process that requires sitosterol trafficking to the er and that, together with activated p38, is necessary for
sitosterol-induced necroptosis. this 2-branch model is based on the findings that both the sterol trafficking blocker u18666a and p38 deficiency block
sitosterol-induced necroptosis, but u18666a does not block p38 activation, and p38 deficiency does not block sterol trafficking to the er. note the inhibitory
action of nec-1 is placed downstream of both pathways because nec-1 does not inhibit either sterol trafficking to the er or p38 activation.
unlike that in advanced lesions, is accompanied by rapid
phagocytic clearance of the dying cells. this efficient phag-
ocytic clearance prevents inflammation and post-apoptotic
necrosis, and so the net effect of early lesional macrophage
death is decreased in lesional macrophage cellularity, which
retards plaque progression (29). therefore, if macrophages
killed by sitosterol were phagocytosed in an efficient and
non-inflammatory manner, sitosterol-induced death in
early, acat-competent macrophages may actually retard
lesion progression. whereas this hypothesis remains a for-
mal possibility pending additional in vivo studies, we found
that macrophages killed by sitosterol are relatively poorly
ingested by phagocytic macrophages (data not shown).
moreover, the association of sitosterolemia with premature
coronary artery disease (above) and the finding that foam
cell lesions in western diet-fed sitosterolemic abcg5g8⫺/⫺;
ldlr⫺/⫺ mice are not significantly smaller than those in
abcg5g8⫹/⫹;ldlr⫺/⫺ mice (10) are consistent with ineffi-
cient phagocytic clearance of sitosterol-killed macrophages.
despite the close association between sitosterolemia and
coronary artery disease, a number of seemingly contradictive
findings have appeared in the literature. for example, a
recent study using a mouse model of sitosterolemia reported
no increase in aortic atherosclerosis (10). however, athero-
sclerosis was assayed by percent en face lipid staining, not by
morphological analyses of advanced lesions that would be
needed to detect lesional macrophage death and plaque
necrosis (10, 71), which is the most relevant parameter
related to the findings and hypothesis here. another area of
recent interest is whether humans without sitosterolemia
per se but with levels of plasma plant sterols in the upper
percentiles of the normal population are at risk for coronary
artery disease (6, 71). such individuals, perhaps due to poly-
the finding that free cholesterol and free sitosterol trigger
macrophage death by fundamentally different mechanisms
is instructive. sterols can trigger processes in cells through
direct effects, for example, by direct interaction with pro-
teins, or by affecting cell membrane structure, which sec-
ondarily affects the function of proteins (79, 80). in the case
of cholesterol loading of macrophages, the latter mechanism
is suggested (55). in particular, fc loading increases the
order of er membrane phospholipids, which is directly cor-
related with inhibition of the activity of an integral er mem-
brane protein, serca, known to play an important role in
upr activation (55). because sitosterol can also increase the
order of phospholipids in membranes (62, 64, 65), inhibit
serca (fig. 4), and activate p38 (fig. 6a; cf. ref. 49), we
expected the upr to be activated as it is with cholesterol.
the surprising result that this did not occur suggested the
possibility that sitosterol may suppress upr activation.
however, we were able to show that chop expression
induced by the upr activator tunicamycin was not sup-
33646 journal of biological chemistry
volume 281 • number 44 • november 3, 2006
pressed by loading macrophages with sitosterol.3 thus, the
explanation must lie elsewhere. whatever the mechanism,
our data indicate that the presence of a 24-␤-ethyl group on
the sterol side chain can have a critical effect on cellular
physiology. indeed, the effect of sitosterol on membrane
structure is not identical to cholesterol (63), and a recent
study showed that sitosterol cannot substitute for choles-
terol to restore growth in chinese hamster ovary cells in
which cholesterol synthesis was completely inhibited (81).
categorizing cellular death as “apoptotic” or “necrotic” can
be challenging, because biochemical and morphological fea-
tures of these and other death processes may co-exist under
certain conditions (82–87). nonetheless, we can be confident
in concluding that the death process induced by sitosterol in
macrophages is different from that induced by cholesterol,
which has features most in common with caspase-dependent
apoptosis (57, 58, 66). the salient features of sitosterol-induced
death include loss of plasma membrane integrity (e.g. pro-
pidium iodide staining and hoechst staining), caspase inde-
pendence, suppression by necrostatin-1, and increase in an
autophagy marker plus partial suppression of death by autoph-
agy inhibitors. these features are remarkably similar to those
described for a type of death in other cells, termed necroptosis,
which is caused by the combination of an apoptosis stimulus
plus a caspase inhibitor or by activation of receptor-interacting
protein, a death receptor-interacting kinase (45, 88). a similar
form of cell death also occurs in neurons in vivo as a conse-
quence of ischemic stroke (45). however, in the study of yuan
and colleagues (45), in which non-macrophage were killed by
the combination of an apoptosis inducer plus a caspase inhibi-
tor, autophagy was proposed to be downstream of necroptosis,
because death was not blocked by autophagy inhibitors. sitos-
terol-loaded macrophages also undergo phosphatidylserine
externalization, and they stain positively for tunel. whereas
these features are often associated with caspase-dependent
apoptosis, they can also be seen with necrotic forms of death
including necroptosis (88, 89). indeed, in sitosterol-induced
death, unlike cholesterol-induced death, tunel staining was
resistant to caspase inhibition (fig. 7c). sitosterol-loaded mac-
rophages also show much less mitochondrial membrane depo-
larization than cholesterol-loaded macrophages (fig. 7e),
which can also be found with necroptotic-like death (88) and
may be due to absence of caspase-mediated amplification of
this process (90).
why the presence of an ethyl group on c24 of the sterol side
chain would trigger necroptotic/autophagic-like death instead
of apoptosis is a fascinating question that arises from this study,
particularly because sterol trafficking to the er is necessary for
both processes. one possibility is that sitosterol accumulation
in macrophages somehow affects molecules in a manner that
would suppress apoptosis and/or promote necroptotic-like
death. for example, sitosterol accumulation may somehow
inhibit caspases or activate receptor-interacting protein
(above). of interest, it is possible that the type of death triggered
by sitosterol may be unique to macrophages or at least to non-
3 l. bao, y. li, s.-x. deng, d. landry, and i. tabas, unpublished data.
sitosterol-induced macrophage death
cancerous cells, because a number of studies have shown that
sitosterol can cause apoptosis in cancer cell lines, and, when
reported, apoptosis was shown to be caspase-dependent
(91, 92).
more important than categorizing the death pathway is elu-
cidating its biological consequences. in general, necrotic forms
of death tend to induce more inflammation than apoptotic
forms of death, usually in response to phagocytic clearance (93),
but exceptions occur (94). how macrophages killed by sitoste-
rol fit into this spectrum, and whether they elicit biological
responses different from cholesterol-killed macrophages, rep-
resent critical areas of future investigation that are highly rele-
vant to atherosclerosis (above). in this context, we have found
that exposure of macrophage phagocytes to macrophages killed
by lipoprotein-sitosterol induces both tumor necrosis factor-␣
and interleukin-1␤mrna in the phagocytes (data not shown).
sitosterol loading of macrophages, like cholesterol loading,
activates p38, and activated p38 is necessary for cell death in
both scenarios (fig. 7 and ref. 49). in the case of cholesterol
loading, cholesterol trafficking to the er is necessary for p38
activation, and p38 activation is necessary for pro-apoptotic
chop expression (49). with sitosterol loading, however, the
scenario is very different: p38 activation is not downstream of
sitosterol trafficking to the er, and it does not result in chop
induction. thus, we propose that two parallel pathways, one
involving sitosterol trafficking to the er and the other involving
p38 activation, conspire to cause necroptotic-like death in mac-
rophages (fig. 9). of interest, there are a number of reports that
have implicated p38 in necroptotic-like death processes (95,
96), and the necroptosis-inducing receptor-interacting protein
has been shown to activate p38 (97).
in summary, we have shown that macrophages exposed to
sitosteryl ester-containing lipoproteins accumulate large
amounts of free sitosterol even in the absence of acat inhibi-
tion, resulting in robust macrophage death. given the role of
advanced lesional macrophage death in plaque necrosis, this
finding may provide at least one cellular mechanism for the
association of sitosterolemia with accelerated atherothrom-
botic vascular disease. moreover, the death process induced by
sitosterol is remarkably different from that induced by free cho-
lesterol, despite the fact that the two sterols are structurally and
functionally very similar and that sterol to er trafficking is nec-
essary for death in both cases. these findings may lead to new
insights into the general issue of how cellular death in the
necrosis-apoptosis continuum is triggered and into the specific
question of how subtle changes in sterol structure, perhaps by
differentially altering er membrane function, can affect these
death processes.
acknowledgments—we thank dr. yibin wang for providing the
p38flox mice used to generate the macrophage-targeted mice referred
to in fig. 6b, dr. takahiro kamimoto for the anti-lc3 antibody, and
dr. tracie devries-seimon for advice with this experiment.
references
1. von bergmann, k., sudhop, t., and lutjohann, d. (2005) am. j. cardiol.
96, 10d–14d
2. berge, k. e., tian, h., graf, g. a., yu, l., grishin, n. v., schultz, j.,
november 3, 2006 • volume 281 • number 44
journal of biological chemistry 33647
sitosterol-induced macrophage death
kwiterovich, p., shan, b., barnes, r., and hobbs, h. h. (2000) science 290,
1771–1775
3. klett, e. l., lu, k., kosters, a., vink, e., lee, m. h., altenburg, m., shefer,
s., batta, a. k., yu, h., chen, j., klein, r., looije, n., oude-elferink, r.,
groen, a. k., maeda, n., salen, g., and patel, s. b. (2004) bmc med. 2, 5
4. salen, g., shefer, s., nguyen, l., ness, g. c., tint, g. s., and shore, v.
(1992) j. lipid res. 33, 945–955
5. salen, g., horak, i., rothkopf, m., cohen, j. l., speck, j., tint, g. s., shore,
v., dayal, b., chen, t., and shefer, s. (1985) j. lipid res. 26, 1126–1133
6. sudhop, t., and von bergmann, k. (2004) z. kardiol. 93, 921–928
7. katayama, s., satoh, t., yagi, t., hirose, n., kurita, y., anzai, t., asakura,
y., yoshikawa, t., mitamura, h., and ogawa, s. (2003) intern. med. 42,
591–594
8. kolovou, g., voudris, v., drogari, e., palatianos, g., and cokkinos, d. v.
(1996) eur. heart j. 17, 965–966
9. kwiterovich, p. o., jr., bachorik, p. s., smith, h. h., mckusick, v. a.,
connor, w. e., teng, b., and sniderman, a. d. (1981) lancet 1, 466–469
10. wilund, k. r., yu, l., xu, f., vega, g. l., grundy, s. m., cohen, j. c., and
hobbs, h. h. (2004) arterioscler. thromb. vasc. biol. 24, 2326–2332
11. nguyen, l. b., salen, g., shefer, s., tint, g. s., and ruiz, f. (2001) metab-
takano, t. (2004) abstracts of the 44th annual meeting of the american
society for cell biology, p. 324a, american society for cell biology, be-
thesda, md
36. fazio, s., major, a. s., swift, l. l., gleaves, l. a., accad, m., linton, m. f.,
and farese, r. v., jr. (2001) j. clin. investig. 107, 163–171
37. feng, b., zhang, d., kuriakose, g., devlin, c. m., kockx, m., and tabas, i.
(2003) proc. natl. acad. sci. u. s. a. 100, 10423–10428
38. feng, b., yao, p. m., li, y., devlin, c. m., zhang, d., harding, h. p.,
sweeney, m., rong, j. x., kuriakose, g., fisher, e. a., marks, a. r., ron, d.,
and tabas, i. (2003) nat. cell biol. 5, 781–792
39. tardif, j. c., gregoire, j., l’allier, p. l., anderson, t. j., bertrand, o.,
reeves, f., title, l. m., alfonso, f., schampaert, e., hassan, a., mclain, r.,
pressler, m. l., ibrahim, r., lesperance, j., blue, j., heinonen, t., and
rodes-cabau, j. (2004) circulation 110, 3372–3377
40. nissen, s. e., tuzcu, e. m., brewer, h. b., sipahi, i., nicholls, s. j., ganz, p.,
schoenhagen, p., waters, d. d., pepine, c. j., crowe, t. d., davidson,
m. h., deanfield, j. e., wisniewski, l. m., hanyok, j. j., and kassalow, l. m.
(2006) n. engl. j. med. 354, 1253–1263
41. field, f. j., and mathur, s. n. (1983) j. lipid res. 24, 409–417
42. tabas, i., feinmark, s. j., and beatini, n. (1989) j. clin. investig. 84,
olism 50, 1224–1229
investig. 51, 509–516
12. boberg, k. m., pettersen, k. s., and prydz, h. (1991) scand. j. clin. lab.
43. liu, j., chang, c. c., westover, e. j., covey, d. f., and chang, t. y. (2005)
13. miettinen, t. a., railo, m., lepantalo, m., and gylling, h. (2005) j. am.
44. temel, r. e., gebre, a. k., parks, j. s., and rudel, l. l. (2003) j. biol. chem.
1713–1721
biochem. j. 391, 389–397
278, 47594–47601
coll. cardiol. 45, 1794–1801
14. bhattacharyya, a. k., and connor, w. e. (1974) j. clin. investig. 53,
1033–1043
15. mellies, m. j., ishikawa, t. t., glueck, c. j., bove, k., and morrison, j.
(1976) j. lab. clin. med. 88, 914–921
16. ross, r. (1995) annu. rev. physiol. 57, 791–804
17. glass, c. k., and witztum, j. l. (2001) cell 104, 503–516
18. lusis, a. j. (2000) nature 407, 233–241
19. brown, m. s., and goldstein, j. l. (1983) annu. rev. biochem. 52, 223–261
20. tabas, i. (2002) j. clin. investig. 110, 905–911
21. aikawa, m., and libby, p. (2004) cardiovasc. pathol. 13, 125–138
22. kolodgie, f. d., virmani, r., burke, a. p., farb, a., weber, d. k., kutys, r.,
finn, a. v., and gold, h. k. (2004) heart 90, 1385–1391
23. burke, a. p., virmani, r., galis, z., haudenschild, c. c., and muller, j. e.
(2003) j. am. coll. cardiol. 41, 1874–1886
24. schaefer, h. e. (1981) hamatol. bluttransfus. 27, 137–142
25. ball, r. y., stowers, e. c., burton, j. h., cary, n. r., skepper, j. n., and
mitchinson, m. j. (1995) atherosclerosis 114, 45–54
26. libby, p., and clinton, s. k. (1993) curr. opin. lipidol. 4, 355–363
27. hegyi, l., skepper, j. n., cary, n. r. b., and mitchinson, m. j. (1996)
j. pathol. 180, 423–429
28. naghavi, m., libby, p., falk, e., casscells, s. w., litovsky, s., rumberger, j.,
badimon, j. j., stefanadis, c., moreno, p., pasterkamp, g., fayad, z., stone,
p. h., waxman, s., raggi, p., madjid, m., zarrabi, a., burke, a., yuan, c.,
fitzgerald, p. j., siscovick, d. s., de korte, c. l., aikawa, m., juhani
airaksinen, k. e., assmann, g., becker, c. r., chesebro, j. h., farb, a.,
galis, z. s., jackson, c., jang, i. k., koenig, w., lodder, r. a., march, k.,
demirovic, j., navab, m., priori, s. g., rekhter, m. d., bahr, r., grundy,
s. m., mehran, r., colombo, a., boerwinkle, e., ballantyne, c., insull, w.,
jr., schwartz, r. s., vogel, r., serruys, p. w., hansson, g. k., faxon, d. p.,
kaul, s., drexler, h., greenland, p., muller, j. e., virmani, r., ridker, p. m.,
zipes, d. p., shah, p. k., and willerson, j. t. (2003) circulation 108,
1664–1672
29. tabas, i. (2005) arterioscler. thromb. vasc. biol. 25, 2255–2264
30. katz, s. s., shipley, g. g., and small, d. m. (1976) j. clin. investig. 58,
200–211
j. lipid res. 24, 1329–1335
32. shio, h., haley, n. j., and fowler, s. (1979) lab. investig. 41, 160–167
33. kruth, h. s., and fry, d. l. (1984) exp. mol. pathol. 40, 288–294
34. kellner-weibel, g.,
j.,
stoltenborg, j. k., kearney, m. a., corjay, m. h., phillips, m. c., and
rothblat, g. h. (1998) arterioscler. thromb. vasc. biol. 18, 423–431
jerome, w. g., small, d. m., warner, g.
35. mori, m., ogasawara, h., ohnishi, a., tanaka, a., asano, t., itabe, h., and
45. degterev, a., huang, z., boyce, m., li, y., jagtap, p., mizushima, n., cuny,
g. d., mitchison, t. j., moskowitz, m. a., and yuan, j. (2005) nat. chem.
biol. 1, 112–119
46. havel, r. j., eder, h., and bragdon, j. (1955) j. clin. investig. 34, 1345–1353
47. basu, s. k., goldstein, j. l., anderson, r. g. w., and brown, m. s. (1976)
proc. natl. acad. sci. u. s. a. 73, 3178–3182
48. ross, a. c., go, k. j., heider, j. g., and rothblat, g. h. (1984) j. biol. chem.
49. devries-seimon, t., li, y., yao, p. m., stone, e., wang, y., davis, r. j.,
flavell, r., and tabas, i. (2005) j. cell biol. 171, 61–73
50. cook, a. d., braine, e. l., and hamilton, j. a. (2003) j. immunol. 171,
259, 815–819
4816–4823
51. li, y., schwabe, r. f., devries-seimon, t., yao, p. m., gerbod-giannone,
m. c., tall, a. r., davis, r. j., flavell, r., brenner, d. a., and tabas, i. (2005)
j. biol. chem. 280, 21763–21772
52. krieger, m. (1986) methods enzymol. 128, 608–613
53. lowry, o. h., rosebrough, n. j., farr, a. l., and randall, r. j. (1951) j. biol.
54. shiratori, y., okwu, a. k., and tabas, i. (1994) j. biol. chem. 269,
chem. 193, 265–275
11337–11348
55. li, y., ge, m., ciani, l., kuriakose, g., westover, e., dura, m., covey, d.,
freed, j. h., maxfield, f. r., lytton, j., and tabas, i. (2004) j. biol. chem.
279, 37030–37039
56. chang, t. y., chang, c. c. y., and cheng, d. (1997) annu. rev. biochem.
66, 613–638
57. warner, g. j., stoudt, g., bamberger, m., johnson, w. j., and rothblat,
g. h. (1995) j. biol. chem. 270, 5772–5778
58. yao, p. m., and tabas, i. (2000) j. biol. chem. 275, 23807–23813
59. salen, g., von bergmann, k., lutjohann, d., kwiterovich, p., kane, j.,
patel, s. b., musliner, t., stein, p., and musser, b. (2004) circulation 109,
966–971
60. rujanavech, c., and silbert, d. f. (1986) j. biol. chem. 261, 7215–7219
61. mora, m. p., tourne-peteilh, c., charveron, m., fabre, b., milon, a., and
muller, i. (1999) chem. phys. lipids 101, 255–265
62. schuler, i., duportail, g., glasser, n., benveniste, p., and hartmann, m. a.
63. halling, k. k., and slotte, j. p. (2004) biochim. biophys. acta 1664,
64. leikin, a. i., and brenner, r. r. (1989) biochim. biophys. acta 1005,
161–171
187–191
65. xu, x., bittman, r., duportail, g., heissler, d., vilcheze, c., and london,
e. (2001) j. biol. chem. 276, 33540–33546
66. yao, p. m., and tabas, i. (2001) j. biol. chem. 276, 42468–42476
31. rapp, j. h., connor, w. e., lin, d. s., inahara, t., and porter, j. m. (1983)
(1990) biochim. biophys. acta 1028, 82–88
33648 journal of biological chemistry
volume 281 • number 44 • november 3, 2006
67. kabeya, y., mizushima, n., ueno, t., yamamoto, a., kirisako, t., noda,
t., kominami, e., ohsumi, y., and yoshimori, t. (2000) embo j. 19,
5720–5728
68. seglen, p. o., and gordon, p. b. (1982) proc. natl. acad. sci. u. s. a. 79,
rawson, r. b. (2005) proc. natl. acad. sci. u. s. a. 102, 14551–14556
82. majno, g., and joris, i. (1995) am. j. pathol. 146, 3–15
83. mcconkey, d. j. (1998) toxicol. lett. 99, 157–168
84. darzynkiewicz, z., bedner, e., traganos, f., and murakami, t. (1998) hu-
sitosterol-induced macrophage death
69. araki, t., hayashi, m., and saruta, t. (2006) cell biol. int. 30, 93–100
70. awad, a. b., toczek, j., and fink, c. s. (2004) prostaglandins leukot.
essent. fatty acids 70, 511–520
71. sehayek, e., and breslow, j. l. (2005) arterioscler. thromb. vasc. biol. 25,
663–669
1889–1892
5–6
72. glueck, c. j., speirs, j., tracy, t., streicher, p., illig, e., and vandegrift, j.
73. rajaratnam, r. a., gylling, h., and miettinen, t. a. (2000) j. am. coll.
(1991) metabolism 40, 842–848
cardiol. 35, 1185–1191
74. sutherland, w. h. f., williams, m. j. a., hye, e. r., restieaux, n. j., de jong,
s. a., and walker, h. l. (1998) nutr. metab. cardiovasc. dis. 8, 386–391
75. assmann, g., cullen, p., erbey, j., ramey, d. r., kannenberg, f., and
schulte, h. (2006) nutr. metab. cardiovasc. dis. 16, 13–21
76. sudhop, t., gottwald, b. m., and von bergmann, k. (2002) metabolism
77. miettinen, t. a., gylling, h., strandberg, t., and sarna, s. (1998) br.
957–962
51, 1519–1521
med. j. 316, 1127–1130
78. yancey, p. g., rodrigueza, w. v., kilsdonk, e. p., stoudt, g. w., johnson,
w. j., phillips, m. c., and rothblat, g. h. (1996) j. biol. chem. 271,
16026–16034
79. yeagle, p. l. (1991) biochimie (paris) 73, 1303–1310
80. maxfield, f. r., and tabas, i. (2005) nature 438, 612–621
81. xu, f., rychnovsky, s. d., belani, j. d., hobbs, h. h., cohen, j. c., and
man cell 11, 3–12
gene 18, 7719–7730
85. fiers, w., beyaert, r., declercq, w., and vandenabeele, p. (1999) onco-
86. edinger, a. l., and thompson, c. b. (2004) curr. opin. cell biol. 16,
87. fink, s. l., and cookson, b. t. (2005) infect. immun. 73, 1907–1916
88. holler, n., zaru, r., micheau, o., thome, m., attinger, a., valitutti, s.,
bodmer, j. l., schneider, p., seed, b., and tschopp, j. (2000) nat. immunol.
1, 489–495
89. grasl-kraupp, b., ruttkay-nedecky, b., koudelka, h., bukowska, k.,
bursch, w., and schulte-hermann, r. (1995) hepatology 21, 1465–1468
90. lakhani, s. a., masud, a., kuida, k., porter, g. a., jr., booth, c. j., mehal,
w. z., inayat, i., and flavell, r. a. (2006) science 311, 847–851
91. awad, a. b., and fink, c. s. (2000) j. nutr. 130, 2127–2130
92. awad, a. b., roy, r., and fink, c. s. (2003) oncol. rep. 10, 497–500
93. fadok, v. a., bratton, d. l., and henson, p. m. (2001) j. clin. investig. 108,
94. li, y., gerbod-giannone, m. c., seitz, h., cui, d., thorp, e., tall, a. r.,
matsushima, g. k., and tabas, i. (2006) j. biol. chem. 281, 6707–6717
95. saito, t., takahashi, h., doken, h., koyama, h., and aratani, y. (2005)
biosci. biotechnol. biochem. 69, 2207–2212
96. cao, j., semenova, m. m., solovyan, v. t., han, j., coffey, e. t., and
courtney, m. j. (2004) j. biol. chem. 279, 35903–35913
97. devin, a., lin, y., and liu, z. g. (2003) embo rep. 4, 623–627
november 3, 2006 • volume 281 • number 44
journal of biological chemistry 33649
lipids and lipoproteins:
sitosterol-containing lipoproteins trigger
free sterol-induced caspase-independent 
death in acat-competent macrophages
  
liping bao, yankun li, shi-xian deng,
donald landry and ira tabas
j. biol. chem. 
doi: 10.1074/jbc.m606339200 originally published online august 24, 2006
2006, 281:33635-33649.
access the most updated version of this article at doi: 
  
find articles, minireviews, reflections and classics on similar topics on the 
  
alerts: 
•  
•  
  
when this article is cited
when a correction for this article is posted
10.1074/jbc.m606339200
jbc affinity sites
click here
 to choose from all of jbc's e-mail alerts
this article cites 96 references, 40 of which can be accessed free at
http://www.jbc.org/content/281/44/33635.full.html#ref-list-1
  