cell tissue res (2007) 327:399â€“414
doi 10.1007/s00441-006-0298-x
regular article
mechanisms of programmed cell death
during oogenesis in drosophila virilis
athanassios d. velentzas & ioannis p. nezis &
dimitrios j. stravopodis & issidora s. papassideri &
lukas h. margaritis
received: 20 march 2006 / accepted: 29 june 2006 / published online: 27 september 2006
# springer-verlag 2006
abstract we describe the features of programmed cell
death occurring in the egg chambers of drosophila virilis
during mid-oogenesis and late oogenesis. during mid-
oogenesis, the spontaneously degenerating egg chambers
exhibit typical characteristics of apoptotic cell death. as
revealed by propidium iodide, rhodamine-conjugated phal-
loidin staining, and the tunel assay, respectively, the
nurse cells contain condensed chromatin, altered actin
cytoskeleton, and fragmented dna.
in vitro caspase
activity assays and immunostaining procedures demonstrate
that the atretic egg chambers possess high levels of caspase
activity. features of autophagic cell death are also observed
during d. virilis mid-oogenesis, as shown by monodansyl-
cadaverine staining, together with an ultrastructural exam-
ination by transmission electron microscopy. during the
late stages of oogenesis in d. virilis, once again, the two
mechanisms, viz., nurse cell cluster apoptosis and auto-
phagy, operate together, manifesting features of cell death
similar to those detailed above. moreover, an altered form
of cytochrome c seems to be released from the mitochon-
dria in the nurse cells proximal to the oocyte. we propose
that apoptosis and autophagy function synergistically
during oogenesis in d. virilis in order to achieve a more
efficient elimination of the degenerated nurse cells and
abnormal egg chambers.
the present study was co-financed within op. education by the
european social fund and by national resources via a grant
(hrakleitos 70/3/7164) to professor l.h. margaritis.
a. d. velentzas : i. p. nezis : d. j. stravopodis :
i. s. papassideri (*) : l. h. margaritis
faculty of biology, department of cell biology and biophysics,
university of athens,
panepistimiopolis 15784,
athens, greece
e-mail: ipapasid@biol.uoa.gr
keywords apoptosis . autophagy . nurse cells .
programmed cell death . drosophila virilis (insecta)
introduction
the structural and functional unit of an insect ovary is the
egg chamber or
the follicle. during oogenesis, egg
chambers are formed in the anterior region of the ovary
and, as they gradually develop, move posteriorly towards
the exit of the ovariole, forming an array of developmen-
tally ordered egg chambers in each ovariole.
in the
meroistic polytrophic ovarioles of drosophila mela-
nogaster, each egg chamber consists of 16 germ-line cells
(15 nurse cells and 1 oocyte) surrounded by a monolayer of
somatic epithelial cells, called follicle cells (trougakos and
margaritis 2002; berg 2005). the role of the nurse cells
during oocyte development is considered to be essential, as
they provide the oocyte with organelles, proteins, and
maternal rnas, all being transferred through the ring
canals (mahajan-miklos and cooley 1994; trougakos and
margaritis 2002). the development of the egg chamber has
been divided into several discrete stages (14 stages
according to king 1970; 20 stages according to margaritis
1985, 1986).
programmed cell death constitutes a highly conserved,
genetically regulated process that is involved in a wide
variety of biological systems, including insect oogenesis,
and that leads to the self-destruction of superfluous cells
through the activation of a cell-suicide program (danial and
korsmeyer 2004). recent studies have revealed that
programmed cell death includes two major types: apoptotic
cell death (or type 1) and autophagic cell death (or type 2),
both being defined by distinct morphological criteria.
apoptotic cell death is mainly characterized by chromatin
400
cell tissue res (2007) 327:399–414
condensation and dna fragmentation, whereas there is no
evidence of major ultrastructural changes in the cytoplas-
mic organelles. the accumulation of autophagic vacuoles in
the cytoplasm represents the most distinct morphological
feature in autophagy-mediated cell death (bursch 2001,
2004; lockshin and zakeri 2004). the major effector
molecules of apoptosis are cysteine proteases called
caspases (richardson and kumar 2002). caspases are
synthesized as inactive pro-enzyme precursors (zymogens,
pro-caspases) and are activated to their functional form by
cleavage at specific aspartic acid residues, resulting in the
generation of two subunits: the large (p20) and the small
(p10) subunit. in living cells, caspases are present as
inactive precursors, but as soon as they receive an apoptotic
signal, they undergo proteolytic cleavage and adopt their
active form (kornbluth and white 2005). in mammals, the
release of cytochrome c from the mitochondria plays an
essential role in the activation of caspase-9, whereas in
drosophila, the functional role of cytochrome c remains
elusive (kornbluth and white 2005). in d. melanogaster,
seven caspase family members have been identified
(reviewed by kumar and doumanis 2000).
even though the execution of the autophagic cell-death
program does not seem to require the participation of
caspases (bursch 2001; gozuacik and kimchi 2004),
various reports indicate that the two types of programmed
cell death act synergistically in many tissues (clarke 1990;
bursch 2004; martin and baehrecke 2004). in both cases,
the dying cells are efficiently phagocytosed either by
neighboring epithelial cells, or by surrounding phagocytes
(krieser and white 2002).
as previously demonstrated, programmed cell death
during dipteran oogenesis occurs in the germarium and
during mid-oogenesis and late oogenesis (drummond-
barbosa and spradling 2001; nezis et al. 2000, 2003,
2006a; for reviews, see mccall 2004; baum et al. 2005).
cell death during mid-oogenesis, known as follicular
atresia, has been sporadically observed not only during
physiological dipteran mid-oogenesis (giorgi and deri
1976; nezis et al. 2000, 2003, 2006a; uchida et al. 2004),
but also as a response to nutritional deprivation, ecdysone
signaling inhibition,
treatment with chemotherapeutic
drugs, and ectopic death of follicle cells in drosophila
(buszczak et al. 1999; chao and nagoshi 1999; de
lorenzo et al. 1999; soller et al. 1999; nezis et al. 2000;
terashima and bownes 2005). atretic egg chambers have
been found to contain degenerated nurse cells, mainly
characterized by condensed chromatin, fragmented dna,
and disorganized actin cytoskeleton (buszczak et al. 1999;
chao and nagoshi 1999; de lorenzo et al. 1999; soller et
al. 1999; nezis et al. 2000, 2003, 2006a). programmed cell
death of nurse and follicle cells is also required for the
normal maturation of the developing follicles during the
late stages of oogenesis in d. melanogaster, bactrocera
oleae, and ceratitis capitata (cavaliere et al. 1998; foley
and cooley 1998; nezis et al. 2000–2003, 2005, 2006b,c;
for reviews, see mccall 2004; baum et al. 2005).
in the present study, we demonstrate that apoptosis and
autophagy coexist during mid-oogenesis and late oogene-
sis of drosophila virilis. apoptosis in mid-oogenesis
exhibits high levels of caspase activity that is not dependent
on conformational unmasking of cytochrome c and that
leads to dna fragmentation. autophagy is mainly charac-
terized by the formation of autophagosomes, combined
with an accumulation of certain cathepsin-like proteases.
apoptosis of the nurse cell cluster during late oogenesis
seems to be related to the release of an altered form of
cytochrome c from mitochondria; this probably results in
caspase activation and, subsequently, to chromatin conden-
sation, dna fragmentation, and actin cytoskeleton reorga-
nization. nurse cell autophagic death during late oogenesis
is mainly characterized by the formation of autophago-
somes, whereas an accumulation of cathepsin-like proteases
is evident. as the apoptotic program is about
to be
completed, autophagy seems to ensure a more efficient
and rapid clearance of the nurse cell remnants by the
adjacent follicle cells.
materials and methods
culturing of d. virilis
d. virilis (diptera, drosophilidae) insects were kept in a
25°c culture room, fed on a standard diet, and slightly
etherized before dissection. staging of the developing egg
chambers during oogenesis in d. virilis was similar to that
in d. melanogaster and was accomplished according to
trougakos and margaritis (2002).
to obtain
ovarioles containing egg chambers at all developmental
stages, the newly emerged flies were transferred immedi-
ately to fresh food in which they were maintained for 3–4
days before dissection.
in order
propidium iodide staining
ovaries were dissected in ringer’s solution and fixed in
phosphate-buffered saline (pbs) containing 4% formalde-
hyde, for 30 min. they were then permeabilized for 25 min
in pbs containing 4% formaldehyde plus 0.1% triton
x-100. after three washes in pbs (5 min each), the follicles
were incubated in pbs containing 600 μg/ml rnasea for
60 min and stained with 700 ng/ml propidium iodide in pbs
for 15 min. finally, the samples were mounted in 90%
glycerol containing 1.4-diazabicyclo (2.2.2) octane (sigma,
cell tissue res (2007) 327:399–414
401
germany) to avoid fading and examined under a nikon ez
2000 confocal laser scanning microscope.
tunel assay
the tunel (terminal transferase-mediated dutp nick-
end labeling) assay was performed as previously described
(nezis et al. 2001, 2003). briefly, follicles were fixed in
pbs containing 4% formaldehyde plus 0.1% triton x-100
for 30 min, extensively washed with pbs, and subse-
quently incubated with pbs containing 20 μg/ml protein-
ase k for 10 min. the in situ detection of fragmented
genomic dna was performed with the boehringer
mannheim tunel kit by using fluorescein-labeled dutp
for 3 h at 37°c in the dark. following this procedure, the
follicles were washed six times in pbs over the course of
90 min in the dark, mounted in antifading mounting
medium, and examined under a nikon eclipse te 2000-s
fluorescent microscope.
rhodamine-conjugated phalloidin staining
ovaries were dissected in ringer’s solution, fixed in pbs
containing 4% formaldehyde for 30 min, and permeabilized
for 45 min in pbs containing 4% formaldehyde plus 0.3%
triton x-100. the follicles were then stained for 2 h in
pbs containing 1 mg/ml rhodamine-conjugated plalloidin
(sigma), washed three times (5 min each)
in pbs,
mounted in antifading mounting medium, and examined
under a nikon ez 2000 confocal
scanning
microscope.
laser
monodansylcadaverine staining for autophagic vacuoles
monodansylcadaverine (mdc) staining was performed as
follows: dissected ovaries were briefly rinsed with pbs and
immediately transferred into pbs containing 0.05 mm
mdc (fluka, sigma-aldrich, germany) for 10 min at 25°c
in the dark (biederbick et al. 1995; nezis et al. 2006b). the
ovaries were then washed four
times with pbs and
immediately observed under a nikon eclipse te 2000-s
fluorescent microscope with the appropriate filters.
active caspase in situ assay
ovaries were dissected from female insects in ringer’s
solution and separated into individual follicles, which were
then examined for the presence of active caspases by means
of the red-vad-fmk detection kit (rhodamine-conjugated
inhibitor of active caspases; oncogene research products,
san diego, usa) or the caspace fitc-vad-fmk in situ
marker (fluoroisothiocyanate-conjugated inhibitor of active
caspases; promega, usa), both assays utilizing the caspase
inhibitor (vad-fmk) conjugated to either sulfo-rhodamine
or fluoroisothiocyanate, thereby allowing the delivery of
the inhibitor into the cell where it binds irreversibly to
activated caspases and serves as an in situ morphological
marker for the detection of caspase activity. during the use
of red-vad-fmk detection kit, follicles were briefly
rinsed with pbs, immediately incubated in the reaction
mixture for 30 min at 25°c in the dark, rinsed three times
with 1× wash buffer, washed twice with pbs, and finally
mounted on glass slides. during the fitc-vad-fmk
assay, follicles were briefly rinsed with pbs, immediately
incubated in the reaction mixture for 30 min at 25°c in the
dark, rinsed three times with pbs, fixed in 10% formalin
for 30 min at 25°c in the dark, washed three times with
pbs, and finally mounted on glass slides. in both cases,
specimens were immediately observed under a nikon
eclipse te 2000-s fluorescent microscope with the
appropriate filters.
immunostaining of whole-mounts
ovaries were dissected from female insects and separated
into individual follicles in ringer’s solution. the egg
chambers were fixed in pbs containing 4% formaldehyde
for 20 min, washed with pbs, incubated in pbs containing
0.1% triton x-100 for 10 min, extensively washed with
pbs, and then incubated in pbs containing 20 mm glycine
and 1.5% bovine serum albumin (bsa) for 45 min. the
primary antibodies used in the present study were as
follows. (1) a mouse anti-cytochrome-c monoclonal anti-
body of the 2ag8 clone was obtained from professor ron
jemmerson (university of minnesota, usa) and used at a
concentration of 22 μg/ml. (2) a rabbit cm1 polyclonal
antibody was supplied by bd biosciences pharmingen
(usa) and used at a dilution of 1:800. this antibody
recognizes processed activated effector caspases in mam-
mals and drosophila (srinivasan et al. 1998; baker and yu
2001; yu et al. 2002). in drosophila, the cm1 antibody has
been shown specifically to recognize a processed activated
form of the effector caspase drice (yu et al. 2002) and is
specifically distributed in nurse cells during oogenesis
(laundrie et al. 2003; peterson et al. 2003). (3) a rabbit
anti-dronc polyclonal antibody that recognizes both the
precursor (50 kda) and the processed (39 kda) form of the
drosophila caspase family member dronc (waldhuber et
al. 2005) was provided by professor claudia petritsch
(ludwig maximilian university munich, germany) and
utilized at a dilution of 1:200. (4) a rabbit anti-procathep-
sin-l (sarcophaga peregrine) polyclonal antibody was
supplied by professor koichi homma (faculty of pharma-
ceutical sciences, university of tokyo, japan) and was
used at a final dilution of 1:1,000. after incubation with the
respective primary antibody, the treated egg chambers were
402
cell tissue res (2007) 327:399–414
washed four times with pbs-t (pbs containing 0.1%
triton x-100 and 0.5% bsa). secondary antibodies,
conjugated with either fitc or rhodamine, were purchased
from santa cruz biotechnology (california, usa). finally,
the egg chambers were mounted in antifading mounting
medium and observed under a nikon ez 2000 confocal
laser scanning microscope or a te 2000-s inverted
fluorescence microscope. routine procedures were applied
as controls to demonstrate the specificity of the immuno-
staining protocols: (1) the use of the pre-immune serum
instead of the antibody serum, and (2) the omission of the
respective primary antibody. no immunoreactivity was
observed in the controls.
light microscopy and transmission electron microscopy
d. virilis follicles were processed for conventional light
microscopy (lm) and transmission electron microscopy
(tem) as follows. ovaries were dissected from female
follicles in ringer’s
insects, separated into individual
solution, and fixed in 2% glutaraldehyde in pbs for 1.5 h
at room temperature. after being rinsed twice with pbs
(20 min each) at room temperature,
the follicles were
stained en block overnight in pbs containing 0.5% uranyl
acetate in the dark, washed twice in pbs for 15 min each at
4°c, and post-fixed in pbs containing 2% osmium
tetroxide for 1 h at 4°c. after
two washes in pbs
(20 min each) at 4°c,
the specimens were dehydrated
through a graded series of ethanol concentrations, infiltrated
in propylene oxide, and embedded in epon-araldite
(fullam, new york, usa). sections (1 μm thick) were
mounted on slides, stained with 0.5% toluidine blue in 1%
sodium borate, and observed with a nikon eclipse te
2000-s light microscope. ultrathin sections were mounted
on uncoated copper grids, stained with uranyl acetate and
lead citrate, and observed under a philips em300 electron
microscope.
immunolocalization by tem
d. virilis follicles were processed for immunolocalization
by tem as follows. ovaries were dissected in ringer’s
solution, separated into individual follicles, and fixed in
pbs containing 0.5% glutaraldehyde and 2% formaldehyde
for 1.5 h at 4°c on a rotating wheel. after two washes in
pbs (20 min each) at 4°c, the ovaries were incubated in
pbs containing 0.1 m glycine for 1 h on a rotating wheel at
4°c. follicles were then washed twice in pbs (20 min
each) at 4°c, dehydrated through a graded series of ethanol
concentrations (20%, 50%, 70%, 90%, and 100% at 4°c;
10 min for each concentration), infiltrated with unicryl resin
(spi supplies, usa) in a graded resin-ethanol series (1:2,
1:1, 2:1) at room temperature (1 h each step) on a rotating
wheel, and finally embedded in pure unicryl resin for 12 h
on a rotating wheel. the specimens were polymerized
under a uv light at 4°c for 3 days. the above embedding
protocol was specifically chosen since it allowed the
adequate preservation of cytochrome c immunogenicity,
even though the general ultrastructural morphology of the
nurse cells (i.e., mitochondrial structure) was relatively
poor. for tem immunolocalizations, thin ovarian sections
were mounted on nickel grids. the grids were then floated
successively on drops of solutions as follows: (1) washes in
pbs (3×5 min), (2) blocking in 3% bsa and 0.1% tween-
20 in pbs (45 min), (3) incubation at room temperature
with the primary monoclonal antibody anti-cytochrome-c
2ag8 clone at a concentration of 44 μg/ml (1 h), (4) a wash
in 0.1% tween-20 in pbs,
room
temperature with the secondary antibody goat anti-mouse
igg conjugated to 15-nm gold particles (british biocell
international, cardiff, uk), used at a 1:30 dilution in
blocking buffer (1 h), (6) a wash in pbs containing 0.1%
tween-20, (7) a wash in pbs, (8) a wash in double-distilled
water, and (9) staining with an aqueous solution of 7%
uranyl acetate. routine procedures were applied as controls
to demonstrate the binding specificity of each primary
antibody: (1) the use of the pre-immune serum instead of
the respective antibody serum, (2) the omission of the
primary antibody, and (3) an additional step between the
incubation with the primary antibody and the specific gold
probe, including treatment of the sections with an unlabeled
goat anti-mouse igg antibody. no detectable immunoreac-
tivity was observed in the controls.
incubation at
(5)
results
apoptotic and autophagic cell-death features in atretic egg
chambers during mid-oogenesis in drosophila virilis
least
egg chambers during mid-oogenesis (stages 7–8) of d.
to degenerate sporadically, with a low
virilis appear
frequency of at
two egg chambers per ovary in
young well-fed flies. the degenerated egg chambers are
mainly characterized by an abnormal morphology com-
pared with that of normal egg chambers at the same stages
(fig. 1). specifically, propidium iodide staining and the
tunel assay, both applied to the degenerated egg
chambers, clearly revealed that the nuclei of the nurse
cells contained condensed chromatin and fragmented
dna, respectively (fig. 1a–d). further analysis of these
abnormal egg chambers by rhodamine-conjugated phallo-
idin staining showed that the actin cytoskeleton of both the
nurse cells and the oocyte was completely different from
the pattern exhibited by normal egg chambers (fig. 1e,f).
using the red-vad-fmk assay, we found that caspases
cell tissue res (2007) 327:399–414
403
were highly activated in all
the atretic egg chambers,
mainly at the nurse cell cluster (fig. 1g). similar results
were also obtained by using the fitc-vad-fmk in situ
assay (data not shown). on the contrary, normal egg
chambers during mid-oogenesis did not exhibit positive
signals for activated caspases (fig. 1i). we next applied a
series of immunostaining approaches in order to illuminate
the participation of caspases and the role of cytochrome c
in egg chamber degeneration. immunodetection with the
cm1 antibody, which specifically recognizes an activated
form of the drosophila caspase drice (peterson et al.
2003), revealed intense staining mainly in the degenerat-
ing nurse cells,
indicating the presence of activated
caspase-3-like proteases, whereas normal egg chambers
during mid-oogenesis did not exhibit positive signals
(fig. 1h,j). in order to clarify whether cytochrome c
played a specific role in the observed caspase activation,
we performed immunostaining with the monoclonal
antibody 2ag8 (mueller and jemmerson 1996) previously
shown to recognize an altered epitope of cytochrome c
during programmed cell death in the egg chambers of d.
melanogaster (varkey et al. 1999). no detectable signal
was ever observed in the sporadically generated atretic
egg chambers of d. virilis during mid-oogenesis in any of
the ovarioles tested (n=182; fig. 1k) or in any of the
ovarioles tested in control experiments (n=52; data not
shown). finally, an immunostaining approach with the
anti-dronc polyclonal antibody (waldhuber et al. 2005)
demonstrated an accumulation of a dronc-like protein in
the abnormal egg chambers, mainly in their nurse cells
(fig. 1m), whereas no signal was observed in the normal
egg chambers during mid-oogenesis (fig. 1l).
we next focused on whether autophagy occurred during
mid-oogenesis of d. virilis. when we applied the mdc
to the atretic egg chambers, several
staining reagent
positive signals were clearly detected throughout
the
degenerated egg chambers, whereas no traceable staining
was observed in the normal egg chambers during mid-
oogenesis (fig. 2a,c). cathepsins have been shown to be
essential components of autolysosomes (kelekar 2005).
therefore, we determined the distribution of such enzymes
in the degenerated egg chambers of d. virilis by immuno-
staining with the anti-procathepsin-l polyclonal antibody
(uchida et al. 2001). the immunolabeling approach
revealed a punctate staining pattern in the atretic egg
chambers mainly at the nurse cell cluster (fig. 2b), whereas
examination of the ultrastructural morphology of these egg
chambers disclosed the presence of large autophagosomes
dispersed in their interior regions,
the egg
chamber (fig. 2e,f). each autophagosome was filled with
numerous vesicles, dense masses, and organelles such as
mitochondria (fig. 2e) and multi-lamellar membranes of
various sizes (fig. 2e,f).
throughout
regulation of degeneration of ovarian nurse cells
during late oogenesis by both apoptotic and autophagic
cell death in d. virilis
chromatin condensation, dna fragmentation, and reorga-
nization of the actin cytoskeleton have been previously
shown to occur during the late developmental stages of
oogenesis in d. melanogaster (mccall and steller 1998;
foley and cooley 1998; cavaliere et al. 1998; nezis et al.
2000). we used propidium iodide staining and the tunel
assay in order to demonstrate chromatin condensation and
dna fragmentation, respectively, in d. virilis. the above
assays revealed no chromatin condensation and no dna
fragmentation events in the nurse cells of any egg chambers
tested during developmental stages 10, 11, and early 12
(fig. 3a–d, data not shown). chromatin condensation and
tunel-positive signals were initially observed at
the
nuclei of a few nurse cells of late stage 12 egg chambers
(fig. 3e,f). during developmental stage 13, the occurrence
of condensed chromatin and fragmented dna character-
ized the majority of nurse cell nuclei (fig. 3g,h).
when further analyzing the apoptotic morphological
features by using rhodamine-conjugated phalloidin, we
revealed not only the subcortical organization of f-actin
in both the nurse cells and the oocyte, but also the
participation of f-actin in the numerous ring canals at
developmental stage 10 (fig. 4a). during the next stages
(11–13), the nurse cells seemed to round up, whereas thick
bundles of actin were generated in the nurse cells (fig. 4b–e).
finally, during developmental stage 14, actin-rich structures
were detected in the nurse cell remnants (fig. 4f).
the nurse cells adjacent
in an attempt to clarify the involvement of cytochrome c
in the apoptotic mechanism of nurse cells degeneration, we
conducted immunolabeling with the anti-cytochrome-c
monoclonal antibody 2ag8 (mueller and jemmerson
1996). at developmental stage 10, no staining could be
detected in any of the egg chambers tested (fig. 5a).
interestingly, during early stage 11, an intense diffuse
immunostaining signal was observed exclusively in the
cytoplasm of
to the oocyte
(fig. 5b). stage-specific distinct immunostaining patterns
were also detected during late stage 11 and stage 12
(fig. 5c,d). no positive signal was detected in the nurse cell
cluster during stage 13 in any of the egg chambers tested
(fig. 5e,f). in order to determine whether this altered form
of cytochrome c was released from the mitochondria during
the execution of the apoptotic program, we performed
immunogold labeling for tem. figure 6a illustrates an egg
chamber of an early stage 11; a representative area of a
nurse cell adjacent
to the oocyte (square 1) and a
representative area of a nurse cell distal
to the oocyte
(square 2) were chosen for further examination. ultrathin
sections were cut from the squared areas and labeled with
404
cell tissue res (2007) 327:399–414
the 2ag8 antibody. the altered form of cytochrome c was
immunolocalized in the nurse cell cytoplasm, specifically
around the mitochondria (site of the majority of the gold
particles) in the nurse cell proximal to the oocyte (fig. 6b,c).
interestingly, the cytoplasm from the nurse cell distal to the
oocyte showed no immunoreactivity (fig. 6e). the distri-
bution of mitochondria demonstrated in fig. 6b,c,e was the
same as that obtained when an egg chamber at the same
stage was subjected to conventional tem (fig. 6d).
when conducting immunostaining with the anti-dronc
antibody, we observed no traceable immunostaining signals
in developmental stage-10 egg chambers (fig. 7a). positive
immunolabeling in the nurse cell cluster was detected
initially in the egg chambers of developmental stage 11 and
continued to be observed until developmental stage 13
(fig. 7c,e,g,i).
we next applied an active caspase in situ assay (fitc-
vad-fmk) in order to investigate the possible participation
and contribution of caspases to the nurse cells death program.
no positive signals for activated caspases could be detected in
any area of the stage 10 and early stage 11 egg chambers
(fig. 7b,d). similar negative results were also obtained when
the cm1 polyclonal antibody was used as a labeling probe
(data not shown). during the following late stage 11,
positive signals for activated caspases and cm1 immuno-
reacting signals were clearly detected (fig. 7f,k), whereas
egg chambers at developmental stages 12 and 13 exhibited
similar positive signals for both assays (fig. 7h,j,l).
in order to examine whether autophagy participated in
the mechanisms of the programmed cell death of nurse cells
during late oogenesis, we used mdc staining for the in
vivo tracing of autophagic vacuoles. stage 11 egg chambers
were devoid of any detectable staining pattern (fig. 8a),
although, during stages 12 and 13, a punctate staining
profile was clearly revealed in the nurse cell cluster
(fig. 8c, data not shown).
immunostaining reactions with the anti-procathepsin-l
polyclonal antibody demonstrated a pattern similar to that
above (fig. 8b,d), whereas examination of the ultrastruc-
tural morphology of stage-12 and stage-13 egg chambers
revealed the presence of autophagosomes in the degen-
erated nurse cells, all of which contained numerous vesicles
and membranes (fig. 8e, data not shown). these autopha-
gic vacuoles were undergoing removal by hetero-phagocy-
tosis from the adjacent follicle cells at stage 14 (fig. 8f).
discussion
as previously shown, programmed cell death occurs
sporadically during mid-oogenesis and normally during
late oogenesis, gradually leading to the degeneration of the
nurse cell cluster in the higher diptera (nezis et al. 2000,
fig. 1 spontaneously induced programmed cell death during d.
virilis mid-oogenesis exhibits typical apoptotic features, such as
chromatin condensation, dna fragmentation, actin cytoskeleton
alterations, and caspase activation. a, b fluorescent images of d.
virilis egg chambers during mid-oogenesis after staining with
propidium iodide. chromatin condensation is detected only in the
nurse cell nuclei of abnormal egg chambers at stages 7–8 and not in
previous developmental stages (b, arrow). however, a representative
normal egg chamber at stages 7–8 does not exhibit chromatin
condensation events (a, arrow). c, d fluorescent images of a normal
(c) and degenerated (d) egg chamber at stages 7–8 after the tunel
assay. the nurse cell nuclei of the atretic egg chamber contain
intensely positive signals (d, arrow) indicating the presence of dna
fragmentation. e, f confocal micrographs of normal (e) and atretic (f)
egg chambers at stages 7–8 after rhodamine-conjugated phalloidin
staining. the subcortical actin cytoskeleton distribution (arrow) and
the numerous ring canals (small arrows) are readily observed in the
normal follicle (e). no actin cytoskeleton in an ordered arrangement
can be detected in the abnormal egg chamber, which contains
disorganized actin-rich structures (f, arrow). g red-vad-fmk
staining of a representative atretic egg chamber at stages 7–8 reveals
the presence of activated caspases.
intense staining signals are
observed in the nurse cell (nc) cluster (arrow). h immunostaining
with the cm1 antibody recognizing an activated form of drice
caspase in drosophila. several positive signals are detected in the
nurse cells (nc) of atretic egg chambers at stages 7–8 (arrows). i red-
vad-fmk staining demonstrating the absence of activated caspases
in normal egg chambers during mid-oogenesis. the weak signal (left)
in the oocyte is attributable to autofluorescence. j immunostaining
with the cm1 antibody shows no detectable immunoreactivity in a
normal stage-8 egg chamber. k immunostaining with the anti-
cytochrome-c monoclonal antibody 2ag8. no traceable staining could
ever be observed during mid-oogenesis (arrow) in any atretic egg
chambers tested. l, m immunolabeling with the anti-dronc polyclonal
antibody. a representative abnormal egg chamber exhibits intense
positive staining mainly at the nurse cells (m, nc, arrow). no staining
is evident in a normal egg chamber of the same stage (l, arrow). bars
100 μm
2001, 2003, 2006a). the efficient completion of this cell-
death program comprises chromatin condensation, dna
fragmentation, and phagocytosis of the cellular debris by
adjacent follicle cells (nezis et al. 2000, 2001, 2003,
2006a). in the present study, we have revealed that the
apoptotic and autophagic cell-death programs operate
together during certain developmental stages of d. virilis
oogenesis.
during mid-oogenesis, the nurse cells of the spontane-
ously degenerating egg chambers exhibit typical morpho-
logical features of apoptosis, such as condensed chromatin,
fragmented dna, and an altered organization of actin
cytoskeleton. the use of the pan-caspase vad substrate has
shown that caspases are highly activated in the atretic egg
chambers. additionally,
immunostaining with the cm1
antibody has demonstrated that the caspase-3 homologous
member, drice,
is also activated. recent studies in d.
melanogaster have indicated the significant role of caspases
and their inhibitors in the implementation of the mid-
oogenesis cell-death program. specifically, the over-expres-
406
cell tissue res (2007) 327:399–414
fig. 2 programmed cell death during d. virilis mid-oogenesis
displays typical features of autophagy. a monodansylcadaverine
(mdc) staining of a representative atretic egg chamber at stages 7–8.
numerous positive signals indicating the generation of autophagic
vacuoles can be observed (arrows) throughout the egg chamber (oc
oocyte, nc nurse cells), whereas no staining is evident in a normal
egg chamber at the same stage (c). the weak signal in the oocyte
(oc in c) is attributable to autofluorescence. b immunolabeling with
the anti-procathepsin-l polyclonal antibody demonstrates a punctate
staining pattern only in the abnormal egg chambers, during mid-
oogenesis, mainly at the nurse cell (nc) cluster (arrows). no staining
can be observed in a normal egg chamber at the same stage (d).
e transmission electron micrograph of an atretic egg chamber at
stages 7–8 illustrating the presence of large autophagosomes in the
nurse cell area (arrow) containing crowded organelles, such as
f transmission electron micrograph of
mitochondria (small arrow).
an atretic egg chamber at stages 7–8 presenting a large autophago-
some (arrow) that has engulfed dense masses and multi-lamellar
membranes (small arrow). bars 100 μm (a–d), 10 μm (e, f)
cell tissue res (2007) 327:399–414
407
fig. 3 stage-specific nurse cell
apoptosis during late oogenesis
in d. virilis is characterized by
nuclear chromatin condensation
and dna fragmentation. propi-
dium iodide staining (a, c, e, g).
tunel assay (b, d, f, h). a, b
stage-10 egg chambers are
completely devoid of any nu-
clear chromatin condensation
and dna fragmentation events,
respectively (fn follicle cell
nuclei, fc follicle cells, oc
oocyte, nn nurse cell nuclei, nc
nurse cells). c, d stage-11 egg
chambers demonstrating the
complete absence of chromatin
condensation and dna frag-
mentation incidents, respectively
(arrows). e, f stage-12 egg
chambers exhibiting both con-
densed chromatin and frag-
mented dna, respectively, in
several nurse cell nuclei
(arrows). g, h during stage 13,
the majority of the nurse cell
nuclei contain highly condensed
chromatin and severely frag-
mented dna, respectively
(arrows). bars 50 μm
sion of an active form of the effector caspase dcp-1 in the
ovary has previously been observed to result
in the
degeneration of the egg chambers during mid-oogenesis
(peterson et al. 2003). the above phenotype is also
characterized by high levels of the activated caspase drice
and can be suppressed by over-expression of the apoptotic
inhibitor diap-1 (peterson et al. 2003). another observa-
tion concerning the mid-oogenesis cell-death program
involves the lack of sporadically degenerated egg chambers
at stages 7–8 of flies defective for the dcp-1 genetic locus
(laundrie et al. 2003; nezis et al. 2005). additionally, the
apical caspases have recently been shown to be highly
activated in atretic egg chambers of d. melanogaster
(mazzalupo and cooley 2006). based on the above data,
fig. 4 actin cytoskeleton reor-
ganization is implemented in a
stage-specific fashion during
late oogenesis in d. virilis.
a–f confocal micrographs
obtained after rhodamine-conju-
gated phalloidin staining.
a representative stage-10 egg
chamber characterized by the
subcortical organization of an
actin cytoskeleton network in
the nurse cells (nc), oocyte
(oc), and follicle cells (fc).
the ring canals (arrow) can also
be observed. b early stage 12.
c late stage 12. d early stage
13. e late stage 13 egg cham-
bers. all demonstrate the for-
mation of actin bundles in the
degenerating nurse cells
(arrows). f in stage-14 egg
chambers, the nurse cell rem-
nants contain actin-rich struc-
tures (arrow). bars 50 μm
408
cell tissue res (2007) 327:399–414
fig. 5 immunolabeling of late-stage egg chambers of d. virilis
demonstrating the presence of an altered cytochrome c conformation,
as revealed by differential
immunogenicity (fc follicle cells, oc
oocyte, nc nurse cells). a–f confocal micrographs of egg chambers
after immunostaining with the anti-cytochrome-c monoclonal antibody
2ag8. a stage-10 egg chambers do not exhibit positive signal.
b during early stage 11, a strong diffuse immunostaining pattern is
mainly found in the cytoplasmic areas of the oocyte-proximal nurse
cells (arrows). c, d a similar cytoplasmic distribution pattern of
cytochrome c is also observed during the following stages of late 11
and 12, respectively (arrows). e, f during stage 13, no signal
is
detectable in the nurse cell cluster of any tested egg chambers. the
weak staining observed in the chorion and respiratory filaments (rf)
in d–f
the images were
photographed with the same exposure time. bars 50 μm
is attributable to autofluorescence. all
we have come to the reasonable conclusion that, in d.
virilis, the homologous members of the dcp-1 and drice fly
caspases are probably responsible for the execution of the
sporadically observed cell-death program during mid-
oogenesis. this assumption is further supported by the
observation that homologous caspase family members exist
in the d. virilis genome (a.d. velentzas et al., unpub-
lished). as previously shown, programmed cell death in
drosophila during mid-oogenesis seems to be mainly
regulated by the proper balance between juvenile hormone
and ecdysone (soller et al. 1999; buszczak et al. 1999).
moreover, recent studies in drosophila indicate a signifi-
cant
transcriptional up-regulation of the gene encoding
dronc caspase after treatment with 20e-hydroxy-ecdysone
and following a low nutrition diet,
resulting in the
degeneration of the egg chambers during mid-oogenesis
(terashima and bownes 2005). thus, our observation of an
accumulation of the dronc-like protein during mid-oogen-
esis in d. virilis is in good agreement with the above
results.
in atretic follicles of the mosquito culex pipiens pallens,
ovarian cathepsin-like proteinases, which have been accu-
mulated within the developing oocyte primarily for em-
bryogenesis, are activated to digest yolk proteins and other
cellular substrate structures (uchida et al. 2001). moreover,
the atretic follicles of the medfly c. capitata exhibit a
significant accumulation of cathepsin-like proteinases
(velentzas et al. 2006) that seems to be similar to the one
cell tissue res (2007) 327:399–414
409
fig. 6 an altered form of cyto-
chrome c is released from mito-
chondria in the nurse cells
adjacent to the oocyte during the
developmental stage 11 of d.
virilis. a light micrograph of
unicryl resin section after tolui-
dine blue staining; an early stage
11 egg chamber (fc follicle
cells, oc oocyte). b, c trans-
mission electron micrographs of
ultrathin sections of the
cytoplasmic area (square 1) in
a (nurse cell proximal to the
oocyte). the sections were
immunolabeled with the anti-
cytochrome-c monoclonal anti-
body 2ag8. gold particles are
observed in the cytoplasm
around the mitochondria (mt,
arrows). of note, a few gold
particles are also localized in the
membrane of the mitochondria
(b, arrowheads). d ultrathin
section of the nurse cell cyto-
plasm of a representative stage-
11 egg chamber (conventional
tem) demonstrating that the
distribution of mitochondria in
the nurse cells is similar to that
in b, c, and e. e ultrathin section
of the cytoplasmic area (square 2)
in a (nurse cell distal to the
oocyte). the section was immu-
nolabeled with the anti-cyto-
chrome-c monoclonal antibody
2ag8. no immunoreactivity is
observed (mt mitochondria).
bars 50 μm (a), 100 nm (b–e)
that we describe in degenerating egg chambers of d. virilis
in the present study. the punctate staining pattern detected
in the atretic egg chambers after anti-procathepsin-l immuno-
staining has revealed the possible accumulation of certain
cathepsin-like proteinases in d. virilis egg chambers;
their
major functional role might thus also lie in the digestion of
yolk proteins and other cellular substrate components. finally,
cathepsins have been implicated in the activation of caspases
(bursch 2001; chwieralski et al. 2006). considering all the
above data, we suggest
the degeneration of the egg
chambers during mid-oogenesis is regulated by a stage-
specific activation of distinct endogenous ovarian proteinases.
the absence of an altered cytochrome c display in the atretic
egg chambers indicates that this particular altered form of
cytochrome c does not participate in the apoptotic process
during mid-oogenesis. however, we cannot exclude the
possibility that other forms of cytochrome c are involved.
that
autophagy is a process that
involves the random
occlusion of cytosolic portions together with organelles by
isolation membranes. a representative isolation membrane
engulfs portions of the cytoplasm, leading to the formation
of a double-membrane-layered initial autophagic vacuole
(or autophagosome) that then fuses with a lysosome and
generates the autolysosome in which the cellular compo-
nents of the vacuole are degraded (bursch 2001, 2004;
lockshin and zakeri 2004; muller et al. 2004; juhasz and
sass 2005).
in multicellular organisms, autophagy is
integrated into cell-death events of post-mitotic cells in
order successfully to deal with the mass of cytoplasm
needed to be degraded and absorbed in a short period of
time, thereby lowering the exigency for macrophages or
epithelial cells to remove the cell corpses (lockshin and
zakeri 2004). during mid-oogenesis in d. virilis,
the
spontaneously degenerated egg chambers contain large
autophagosomes. therefore, we reasonably assume that
the cellular content of the nurse cells and oocyte of the
atretic egg chambers are partially lysed and degraded inside
the generated autophagosomes. thus, the follicle cells that
phagocytose the nurse cells and oocyte remnants (nezis et
al. 2003, 2006a) have less work to accomplish. addition-
ally, during late oogenesis, the degenerated nurse cells also
contain several autophagosomes. the presence of autopha-
cell tissue res (2007) 327:399–414
410
fig. 7 caspase accumulation
and activation occur during the
late stages of oogenesis in d.
virilis. a–l confocal and con-
ventional light micrographs of
egg chambers after immuno-
staining with the anti-dronc
polyclonal antibody (a, c, e, g, i),
after fitc-vad-fmk assay
(b, d, f, h, j), and after im-
munolabeling with the cm1
polyclonal antibody (k, l). a no
anti-dronc signal is observed
during stage 10. c, e, g, i
cytoplasmic staining signals
(arrows) are clearly detected in
the nurse cells during stages 11
(c, e), 12 (g), and 13 (i). b, d no
active caspase labeling signals
can be distinguished in the nurse
cells during stages 10 and early
11, respectively (arrows). f, h, j
caspase activity (arrows) is ob-
served in the nurse cells during
the late 11 (f), 12 (h), and 13 (j)
stages. k, l positive staining
signals (arrows), indicating the
occurrence of activated caspase-
3-like (i.e., drice or drice-like)
proteins, are present in the nurse
cells during stages 11 (k) and 12
(l). the weak signal observed in
the oocyte in b and d is attribut-
able to autofluorescence. b, d
these images were taken at
a longer exposure time than the
others in order to visualize the
egg chamber and especially
the nurse cell cluster (since not
stained); this causes enhanced
autofluorescence of the oocyte.
all other images were obtained
with the same exposure times
(fc follicle cells, nc nurse cells,
oc oocyte). bars 50 μm
gosomes has been previously shown during late oogenesis
d. melanogaster, although it has not been extensively
examined (witkus et al. 1980; nezis et al. 2000). we
propose that the process of autophagy allows the follicular
epithelium to achieve a more efficient and rapid clearance
of the cellular remnants in the degenerated egg chambers
during mid-oogenesis in d. virilis.
during the late stages of d. virilis oogenesis, the nurse
cells are characterized by condensed nuclear chromatin,
fragmented dna, a disorganized actin cytoskeleton net-
work, an altered cytochrome c display, and activated
caspases. in the egg chambers of d. melanogaster,
the
anti-cytochrome-c monoclonal antibody 2ag8 has been
proposed to recognize an altered configuration of the
fig. 8 nurse cells undergoing programmed cell death during late
oogenesis in d. virilis exhibit distinct features of autophagy. a, b
during stage 11 (nc nurse cells, oc oocyte), no positive signal is
detectable (arrows) after mdc staining (a) or following immunostain-
ing with the anti-procathepsin-l polyclonal antibody (b). c, d by stage
13, clearly detectable bright specks of mdc staining (c) and
procathepsin l immunostaining (d) appear in the nurse cell cluster
(arrows). note the absence of staining in the nurse cells of the stage-
in c (small arrow). e transmission electron
10 egg chamber
micrograph of a stage-12 egg chamber. autophagosomes (arrows)
are present in the nurse cell. f transmission electron micrograph of a
stage-14 egg chamber demonstrating numerous phagosomes (arrows) in
the follicle cells that surround the nurse cells (fcn follicle cell nucleus).
the weak staining observed in the chorion and respiratory filaments
(rf) in d is attributable to autofluorescence. bars 50 μm (a–d,
1 μm (e), 10 μm (f)
~<uc rt (201’)
plulcm um! labels spucilud . dymg culls wax cy cl :11,
1099'). mmcmut. immunulu zalmn lms rm ﬁled a
)7qu is pullcm m slaghob cgg thumb; ‘ \vh
bxuthcm al i'lacliunauun cxpcnmcnls h. x. shown lhul
jll
cymchmmu c is nul rclcascd liom mllorhomlnu 111 sl‘
culls 1111c] (hc inducuun ul'apoplus ‘ although no blochunr
ical l'r liunauon m“: bum pcn'ummd wilh isolulcd
ugg clumbcrs at u ion.» dmclupmunlal 5 gas {\k
@ spnngex
412
fig. 9 representation of the
programmed cell-death
pathways activated during
mid-oogenesis (left) and late
oogenesis (right) of d. virilis,
mainly demonstrating the dif-
ferential regulatory role of the
altered form of cytochrome c,
the involvement of the activated
caspase repertoire, and the syn-
ergistic operation of apoptosis
and autophagy for the elimina-
tion of the nurse cell remnants
cell tissue res (2007) 327:399–414
mid - oogenesis
cell death stimulus(i)
dronc – like accumulation/activation
late  oogenesis
cell death stimulus(i)
altered cytochrome c display and release
dronc – like accumulation/activation
drice – like activation
drice – like activation
dna fragmentation
alterations in cytoskeleton
dna fragmentation
alterations in cytoskeleton
formation of 
formation of 
autophagosomes
autophagosomes
absorption of the nurse cells
absorption of the nurse cells
al. 1999). on the contrary, mccall’s group (peterson et al.
2003) has recently demonstrated that the staining profile of
the antibody 2ag8, which directly reflects the distribution
of cytochrome c in the developing egg chambers of
d. melanogaster,
is completely different from that de-
scribed by varkey et al. (1999); it consists of a “sunrise”
staining pattern at the nurse cells adjacent to the oocyte.
using the same antibody, we have clearly detected this
altered cytochrome c display in the nurse cells adjacent to
the oocyte in stage-11 egg chambers, in which it produces a
diffuse immunostaining pattern in the cytoplasm. our
observations in d. virilis corroborate the previously
reported results by peterson et al. (2003). moreover, we
have systematically demonstrated the differential distribu-
tion of 2ag8 immunostaining during the developmental
transition of the egg chamber from stage 11 to stage 12.
interestingly, the nurse cells that are located adjacent to the
oocyte have been previously shown to exhibit nurse cell
nuclei with irregular lobes comparable to the nuclei of the
nurse cells lying distal to the oocyte in d. melanogaster
(nezis et al. 2000). from the above data, we suggest that
apoptosis is initially activated in the nurse cells proximal to
the oocyte, from which apoptotic signals emanate to the rest
of the nurse cell cluster (i.e., those distal to the oocyte “sub-
compartment”). moreover, by an immunogold tem ap-
proach, we have observed the release of this altered form of
cytochrome c from mitochondria. however, the involve-
ment of cytochrome c in the activation of the drosophila
caspase repertoire remains controversial (yu et al. 2006;
arama et al. 2006). further work,
including d. virilis
oogenesis, is therefore necessary in order to improve our
understanding of the participation of cytochrome c in
drosophila apoptosis.
dronc-like protein accumulation and caspase activation
(red-vad-fmk staining and cm-1 immunolabeling) are
also observed within the same developmental stage. we
propose that, during stage 11, the execution of the cell-
death program of the nurse cells is initiated by the release
of an altered form of cytochrome c from mitochondria into
the vicinal cytoplasm. this primal event probably results in
the accumulation/activation of (initiator) dronc-like cas-
pases that subsequently regulate (effector) caspase-3-like
(drice, or drice-like) activities, the final executors of the
cell-death program in the nurse cells of d. virilis.
alternatively,
the stage-specific accumulation of cathep-
sin-like proteinases might lead to the activation of caspases
(bursch 2001; chwieralski et al. 2006). in a recently
published article, mazzalupo and cooley (2006) suggest
that apical caspases do not participate during developmental
stages 10 and 11, although they have observed apical
caspase activity during stages 12 and 13. our observations
in d. virilis with the pancaspase substrate have revealed
caspase activity during late oogenesis. in total, the above
data reveal
the manifestations of programmed cell
death between the two drosophila species are similar and
phylogenetically conserved.
that
in the present study, we have tried to elucidate the
mechanisms of programmed cell death during oogenesis in
d. virilis. during mid-oogenesis, the cell-death stimuli(us)
probably induce(s) the accumulation/activation of dronc-
cell tissue res (2007) 327:399–414
413
independently of
like proteins,
the involvement of a
particular altered form of cytochrome c that is specifically
recognized by the 2ag8 monoclonal antibody. subsequent-
ly, drice-like caspases are activated, probably resulting in
dna fragmentation and actin cytoskeleton disorganization.
at the same time, autophagosomes are formed in order to
lower the exigency of the adjacent follicle cells to remove
the nurse cell corpses (fig. 9).
during late oogenesis, the cell-death stimuli(us) trigger
(s) the release of an altered form of cytochrome c from
the mitochondria of the nurse cells. the cytoplasmic
retention of cytochrome c probably results in the
accumulation/activation of dronc-like proteins. subse-
quently, drice-like caspases are activated, possibly caus-
ing, as previously mentioned, dna fragmentation and
severe alterations to the actin cytoskeleton network.
autophagosomes are also generated in order to support
absorption of the nurse cells remnants by the adjacent
follicle cells (fig. 9).
in general, we propose that
autophagy follows the completion of the execution phase
of apoptosis and significantly contributes to the rapid and
efficient clearance of
the apoptotic corpses from the
adjacent follicular epithelium.
acknowledgements the authors are grateful
to professors r.
jemmerson, c. petritsch, and k. homma for kindly supplying us
with antibodies and to professor h.m. moutsopoulos (department of
pathophysiology, medical school, university of athens, athens,
greece), for kindly providing confocal
laser scanning microscope
facilities.
references
arama e, bader m, srivastava m, bergmann a, steller h (2006) the
two drosophila cytochrome c proteins can function in both
respiration and caspase activation. embo j 25:232–243
baker ne, yu sy (2001) the egf receptor defines domains of cell
cycle progression and survival to regulate cell number in the
developing drosophila eye. cell 104:699–708
baum js, st george jp, mccall k (2005) programmed cell death in
the germline. semin cell dev biol 16:245–259
berg ca (2005) the drosophila shell game: patterning and
morphological change. trends genet 21:346–355
biederbick a, kern hf, elsasser hp (1995) monodansylcadaverine
(mdc) is a specific in vivo marker for autophagic vacuoles. eur
j cell biol 66:3–14
bursch w (2001) the autophagosomal-lysosomal compartment
in
programmed cell death. cell death differ 8:569–581
bursch w (2004) multiple cell death programs: charon’s lifts to
hades. fems yeast res 5:101–110
buszczak m, freeman mr, carlson jr, bender m, cooley l,
segraves wa (1999) ecdysone response genes govern egg
chamber development during mid-oogenesis in drosophila.
development 126:4581–4589
cavaliere v, taddei c, gargiulo g (1998) apoptosis of nurse cells at
the late stages of oogenesis of drosophila melanogaster. dev
genes evol 208:106–112
chao s, nagoshi rn (1999) induction of apoptosis in the germline
and follicle layer of drosophila egg chambers. mech dev
88:159–172
chwieralski ce, welte t, buhling f (2006) cathepsin-regulated
apoptosis. apoptosis 2:143–149
clarke pg (1990) developmental cell death: morphological diversity
and multiple mechanisms. anat embryol (berlin) 181:195–213
danial nn, korsmeyer sj (2004) cell death: critical control points.
cell 116:205–219
de lorenzo c, strand d, mechler bm (1999) requirement of
drosophila i(2)gl function for survival of the germline cells
and organization of the follicle cells in a columnar epithelium
during oogenesis. int j dev biol 43:207–217
drummond-barbosa d, spradling ac (2001) stem cells and their
progeny respond to nutritional changes during drosophila
oogenesis. dev biol 231:265–278
foley k, cooley l (1998) apoptosis in late stage drosophila nurse
require genes within the h99 deficiency.
cells does not
development 125:1075–1082
giorgi f, deri p (1976) cell death in ovarian chambers of drosophila
melanogaster. j embryol exp morphol 35:521–533
gozuacik d, kimchi a (2004) autophagy as a cell death and tumor
suppressor mechanism. oncogene 23:2891–2906
juhasz g, sass m (2005) hid can induce, but is not required for
autophagy in polyploid larval drosophila tissues. eur j cell biol
84:491–502
kelekar a (2005) autophagy. ann ny acad sci 1066:259–271
king rc (1970) origin and development of the egg chamber within
the adult ovarioles. in: king rc (ed) ovarian development in
drosophila melanogaster. academic press, new york london,
pp 38–54
kornbluth s, white k (2005) apoptosis in drosophila: neither fish
nor fowl (nor man, nor worm). j cell sci 118:1779–1787
krieser rj, white k (2002) engulfment mechanism of apoptotic cells.
curr opin cell biol 14:734–738
kumar s, doumanis j (2000) the fly caspases. cell death differ
11:1039–1044
laundrie b, peterson js, baum js, chang jc, fileppo d, thompson
sr, mccall k (2003) germline cell death is inhibited by
p-element insertions disrupting the dcp-1/pita nested gene pair
in drosophila. genetics 165:1881–1888
lockshin ra, zakeri z (2004) apoptosis, autophagy and more. int j
biochem cell biol 36:2405–2419
mahajan-miklos s, cooley l (1994) intercellular cytoplasm transport
during drosophila oogenesis. dev biol 165:336–351
margaritis lh (1985) structure and physiology of the eggshell. in:
gilbert li, kerkut ga (eds) comprehensive insect biochemistry,
physiology and pharmacology, vol 1. pergammon, oxford new
york, pp 151–230
margaritis lh (1986) the eggshell of drosophila melanogaster. new
staging characteristics and fine structural analysis of chorio-
genesis. can j zool 64:2152–2175
martin dn, baehrecke eh (2004) caspases function in autopha-
gic programmed cell death in drosophila. development
131:275–284
mazzalupo s, cooley l (2006) illuminating the role of caspases
during drosophila oogenesis. cell death differ, doi 10.1038/sj.
cdd.4401892
mccall k (2004) eggs over easy: cell death in the drosophila ovary.
dev biol 274:3–14
mccall k, steller h (1998) requirement for dcp-1 caspase during
drosophila oogenesis. science 279:230–234
mueller cm, jemmerson r (1996) maturation of the antibody
response to the major epitope on the self antigen mouse
cytochrome c. restricted v gene usage, selected mutations and
increased affinity. j immunol 157:5329–5338
414
cell tissue res (2007) 327:399–414
muller f, adori c, sass m (2004) autophagic and apoptotic features
during programmed cell death in the fat body of the tobacco
hornworm (manduca sexta). eur j cell biol 83:67–78
nezis ip, stravopodis dj, papassideri i, robert-nicoud m, margaritis
lh (2000) stage-specific apoptotic patterns during drosophila
oogenesis. eur j cell biol 79:610–620
nezis ip, stravopodis dj, papassideri i, margaritis lh (2001) actin
cytoskeleton reorganization of the apoptotic nurse cells during
the late developmental stages of oogenesis in dacus oleae. cell
motil cytoskeleton 48:224–233
nezis ip, stravopodis dj, papassideri i, robert-nicoud m, margaritis
lh (2002) the dynamics of apoptosis in the ovarian follicle cells
during the late stages of drosophila oogenesis. cell tissue res
307:401–409
nezis ip, modes v, mpakou v, stravopodis dj, papassideri is,
mammali
i, margaritis lh (2003) modes of programmed
cell death during ceratitis capitata oogenesis. tissue cell
35:113–119
nezis ip, stravopodis dj, papassideri is, stergiopoulos c, margaritis
lh (2005) morphological irregularities and features of resistance
to apoptosis in the dcp-1/pita double mutated egg chambers
during drosophila oogenesis. cell motil cytoskeleton 60:14–23
nezis ip, stravopodis dj, margaritis lh, papassideri is (2006a)
follicular atresia during dacus oleae oogenesis. j insect physiol
52:282–290
nezis ip, stravopodis dj, margaritis lh, papassideri is (2006b)
programmed cell death of follicular epithelium during the late
developmental stages of oogenesis in the fruit flies bactrocera
oleae and ceratitis capitata (diptera, tephritidae) is mediated by
autophagy. dev growth differ 48:189–198
nezis ip, stravopodis dj, margaritis lh, papassideri is (2006c)
chromatin condensation of ovarian nurse and follicle cells is
regulated independently from dna fragmentation during dro-
sophila late oogenesis. differentiation 74:293–304
peterson js, barkett m, mccall k (2003) stage-specific regulation of
caspase activity in drosophila oogenesis. dev biol 260:113–123
richardson h, kumar s (2002) death to flies: drosophila as a model
system to study programmed cell death. j immunol methods
265:21–38
soller m, bownes m, kubli e (1999) control of oocyte maturation in
sexually mature drosophila females. dev biol 208:337–351
srinivasan a, roth ka, sayers ro, shindler ks, wong am, fritz
lc, tomaselli kj (1998) in situ immunodetection of activated
caspase-3 in apoptotic neurons in the developing nervous system.
cell death differ 5:1004–1016
terashima j, bownes m (2005) a microarray analysis of genes
intake in
involved in relating egg production to nutritional
drosophila melanogaster. cell death differ 12:429–440
trougakos ip, margaritis lh (2002) novel morphological and
physiological aspects of insect eggs. in: hilker m, meiners t
(eds) chemoecology of insect eggs and egg deposition. black-
well, berlin, pp 3–36
uchida k, ohmori d, ueno t, nishizuka m, eshita y, fukunaga a,
kominami e (2001) preoviposition activation of cathepsin-like
proteinases in degenerating ovarian follicles of the mosquito
culex pipiens pallens. dev biol 237:68–78
uchida k, nishizuka m, ohmori d, ueno t, eshita y, fukunaga a
(2004) follicular epithelial cell apoptosis of atretic follicles
within developing ovaries of the mosquito culex pipiens pallens.
j insect physiol 50:903–912
varkey j, chen p, jemmerson r, abrams jm (1999) altered
cytochrome c display precedes apoptotic cell death in drosophila.
j cell biol 144:701–710
velentzas ad, nezis ip, stravopodis dj, papassideri is, margaritis
lh (2006) stage-specific regulation of programmed cell death
during oogenesis in the medfly ceratitis capitata. int j dev biol
(in press)
waldhuber m, emoto k, petritsch c (2005) the drosophila caspase
dronc is required for metamorphosis and cell death in
response to irradiation and developmental signals. mech dev
122:914–927
witkus er, altman lg, taparowsky ja (1980) an investigation of
the presence of smooth endoplasmic reticulum and gerl during
vitellogenesis in the ovary of drosophila melanogaster. exp cell
biol 48:373–383
yu sy, yoo sj, yang l, zapata c, srinivasan a, hay ba, baker ne
(2002) a pathway of signals regulating effector and initiator
caspases in the developing drosophila eye. development
129:3269–3278
yu x, wang l, acehan d, wang x, akey cw (2006) three-
dimensional structure of a double apoptosome formed by the
drosophila apaf-1 related killer. j mol biol 355:577–589