published november 13, 2006
jcb: article
calpain is required for macroautophagy 
in mammalian cells
francesca demarchi,1 cosetta bertoli,1 tamara copetti,1 isei tanida,2 claudio brancolini,3 eeva-liisa eskelinen,4 
and claudio schneider1,3
1laboratorio nazionale consorzio interuniversitario biotecnologie, 34012 trieste, italy
2department of biochemistry, juntendo university school of medicine, bunkyo-ku, tokyo 113-8421, japan
3dipartimento di scienze e tecnologie biomediche, universitá degli studi di udine, 33100 udine, italy
4department of biological and environmental sciences, division of biochemistry, 00014 university of helsinki, helsinki, finland
u biquitously  expressed  micro-  and  millicalpain, 
which both require the calpain small 1 (capns1) 
regulatory subunit for function, play important roles 
in  numerous  biological  and  pathological  phenomena. 
we  have  previously  shown  that  the  product  of  gas2, 
a gene speciﬁ cally induced at growth arrest, is an inhibitor 
of millicalpain and that its overexpression sensitizes cells 
to  apoptosis  in  a  p53-dependent  manner  (benetti,  r., 
g.  del  sal,  m.  monte,  g.  paroni,  c.  brancolini,  and 
c. schneider.  2001.  embo  j.  20:2702–2714).  more 
 recently, we have shown that calpain is also involved in 
nuclear  factor  κb  activation  and  its  relative  prosurvival 
function in response to ceramide, in which calpain deﬁ -
ciency  strengthens  the  proapoptotic  effect  of  ceramide 
(demarchi,  f.,  c.  bertoli,  p.a.  greer,  and  c.  schneider. 
2005. cell death differ. 12:512–522). here, we further 
explore the involvement of calpain in the apoptotic switch 
and ﬁ nd that in calpain-deﬁ cient cells, autophagy is im-
paired with a resulting dramatic increase in apoptotic cell 
death. immunostaining of the endogenous autophagosome 
marker lc3 and electron microscopy experiments demon-
strate  that  autophagy  is  impaired  in  capns1-deﬁ cient 
cells. accordingly, the enhancement of lysosomal activity 
and long-lived protein degradation, which normally occur 
upon  starvation,  is  also  reduced.  in  capns1-depleted 
cells,  ectopic  lc3  accumulates  in  early  endosome-like 
 vesicles that may represent a salvage pathway for protein 
degradation when autophagy is defective.
introduction
macroautophagy, which is usually referred to as autophagy, is 
responsible for degradation of the majority of intracellular pro-
teins in mammalian cells, particularly during starvation-induced 
proteolysis. cytosolic proteins, organelles, and selected regions 
of the nucleus can be cleared by autophagy to ensure cellular 
homeostasis  and  remove  damaged  or  unwanted  products 
(klionsky,  2005).  cytoplasmic  constituents  are  fi rst  enclosed 
by a double-membrane autophagosome; next, the outer mem-
brane of the autophagosome fuses with the lysosome, with the 
consequent destruction of the cargo and the inner membrane of 
the autophagosome by hydrolytic enzymes.
the autophagic pathway has been dissected at the mo-
lecular level in yeast, in which 27 genes, referred to as atg, 
correspondence to claudio schneider: schneide@lncib.it
abbreviations  used  in  this  paper:  3ma,  3-methyladenine;  av,  autophagic 
 vacuole; capns, calpain small; ebss, earle’s balanced salt solution; mef, 
mouse embryonic ﬁ broblast; pi, propidium iodide.
the online version of this article contains supplemental material.
© the rockefeller university press   $8.00
the journal of cell biology, vol. 175, no. 4, november 20, 2006 595–605
http://www.jcb.org/cgi/doi/10.1083/jcb.200601024
have been found to be required for autophagosome formation 
(klionsky and ohsumi, 1999; yorimitsu and klionsky, 2005). 
two  ubiquitin-like  conjugation  systems  are  involved  in  the 
 process: one mediates the covalent attachment of atg12 to atg5, 
and the other mediates the conjugation of atg8 to phosphatidyl-
ethanolamine  (ichimura  et  al.,  2000).  the  resulting  products, 
atg12–atg5 and atg8-phosphatidylethanolamine, are essential 
for proper autophagosome formation. only a small fraction of 
the atg12–atg5 complex localizes at the autophagic isolation 
membrane throughout elongation, and the complex dissociates 
when the phagosome is complete. on the other hand, atg8 
 remains on the mature autophagosome constituting the recog-
nized consensus marker of this structure. these two conjugation 
systems  are  highly  conserved  in  mammalian  cells.  atg5-
 defi cient stem cells have been instrumental for demonstrating 
that the atg12–atg5 complex localizes at autophagosome pre-
cursors and plays an essential role in autophagosome formation 
(mizushima  et  al.,  2001).  the  production  of  atg5-defi cient 
mice  has  revealed  that  autophagy  is  required  for  neonatal 
supplemental material can be found at:
http://jcb.rupress.org/content/suppl/2006/11/10/jcb.200601024.dc1.html 
jcb 595
published november 13, 2006
figure  1.  capns1−/−  mefs  lacking  calpain 
activity  are  defective  in  autophagosome  for-
mation. (a and b) wild-type and capns1−/− 
mefs were stimulated for 3 h with rapamycin 
or ceramide and analyzed by immunoﬂ uores-
cence using an anti-lc3–speciﬁ c antibody and 
pi to stain nuclei (a) or were lysed and used 
for western blot analysis with the same anti-
body  to  detect  both  cytoplasmic  lc3i  and 
membrane-associated  lc3ii  (b).  actin  was 
used  as  a  loading  control.  (b)  the  ratio  be-
tween the intensities of lc3ii and lc3i bands is 
indicated below each lane. bar, 20 μm.
 survival before maternal feeding (kuma et al., 2004). the anal-
ysis of endogenous lc3, which is one of the mammalian homo-
logues of atg8, and the production of transgenic mice expressing 
a fl uorescent autophagosomal lc3 have shown that the regula-
tion of autophagy is organ dependent and that the role of auto-
phagy  is  not  restricted  to  the  starvation  response  (mizushima 
et al., 2004).
a pivotal role for autophagy in growth control has emerged 
from studies on beclin1, the mammalian homologue of atg6. 
the  beclin1  gene  is  deleted  in  several  types  of  breast  cancer 
that are unable to activate autophagy (liang et al., 1999) and 
functions  as  a  haploinsuffi cient  tumor  suppressor  gene  (yue 
et al., 2003). in addition to involvement in growth control, 
 programmed autophagy plays a role in differentiation (ghidoni 
et al., 1996; lee et al., 2002) and tissue remodeling (rusten et al., 
2004). moreover, autophagy may be artifi cially induced by ra-
diation and treatment with certain drugs, including rapamycin 
(noda  and  ohsumi,  1998),  ceramide  (scarlatti  et  al.,  2004), 
 arsenic trioxide (kanzawa et al., 2003), and tamoxifen (bursch 
et al., 2000); the fi nal outcome of such induction is still a matter 
of debate (kroemer and jaattela, 2005).
the calpain family of cysteine proteases is composed of 
both ubiquitous and tissue-specifi c isoforms that share homol-
ogy in their protease domain and are calcium dependent (goll 
et al., 2003). the best-characterized ubiquitous calpains are the 
isoforms μ- and m-calpain, which are also known as calpain 1 
and  calpain  2,  respectively.  both  contain  an  80-kd  catalytic 
subunit  and  share  a  common  28-kd  regulatory  subunit  com-
monly known as calpain 4 that is required for proper activity. 
hereafter,  calpain  4  will  be  referred  to  as  calpain  small  1 
(capns1) in accordance with the nomenclature reported at the 
calpain  website  (http://ag.arizona.edu/calpains). a  homologue 
to capns1, capns2, has been described previously (schad 
et al., 2002). this protein appears to be a functional equivalent 
to  capns1  in  vitro;  however,  its  in  vivo  function  and  tissue 
distribution are still controversial. interestingly, ubiquitous cal-
pains are associated with the endoplasmic reticulum and golgi, 
a likely reservoir for autophagosome membranes (hood et al., 
2004),  where  the  essential  autophagy  regulatory  complex 
pi3k–beclin also localizes (kihara et al., 2001).
calpain  is  required  for  normal  embryonic  development. 
indeed, the targeted disruption of capns1 is embryonic lethal 
at days 10 and 11 as a result of severe defects in vascular devel-
opment (arthur et al., 2000). calpain is a regulator of adhesive 
596
jcb • volume 175 • number 4 • 2006
complex dynamics in adherent cells (bhatt et al., 2002); it plays 
an important role in osteoclastic bone resorption (hayashi et al., 
2005)  and  is  required  for  phagocytosis  in  human  neutrophils 
(dewitt and hallett, 2002).
we have become interested in calpain function because of 
our observation that the product of gas2, a gene specifi cally 
induced at growth arrest, is in fact an inhibitor of millicalpain 
and that its overexpression sensitizes cells to apoptosis in a p53-
dependent manner (benetti et al., 2001). more recently, we have 
shown that calpain is also involved in nf-κb activation and in 
its  relative  prosurvival  function  in  response  to  ceramide,  in 
which calpain defi ciency strengthens the proapoptotic effect of 
ceramide (demarchi et al., 2005). in this study, we further ex-
plore  the  involvement  of  calpain  in  the  apoptotic  switch  and 
fi nd that in calpain-defi cient cells, autophagy is impaired with 
a resulting dramatic increase in apoptotic cell death.
results
the lack of calpain activity is coupled 
to a block in autophagy
we have previously reported that calpain plays a crucial role in 
cell death regulation in response to ceramide. indeed, we demon-
strated that the lack of calpain activity results in a considerable 
figure 2.  capns1 depletion is coupled to a block in autophagosome 
 formation in human cells. (a and b) u2os cells were silenced with control 
sirna or capns1 sirna and, 72 h later, were stimulated with ceramide 
for 3 h to trigger macroautophagy, as indicated in the ﬁ gure. afterward, 
the cells were ﬁ xed and decorated with anti-lc3 and pi (a) or were lysed 
to perform western analysis against endogenous lc3 (b). actin was used 
as a loading control; anti-capns1 antibody was used to check silencing 
efﬁ ciency. (b) the ratio between the intensities of lc3ii and lc3i bands is 
indicated below each lane. bar, 20 μm.
published november 13, 2006
increase in apoptotic cell death (demarchi et al., 2005). to fur-
ther investigate the involvement of calpain in the modulation of 
alternative types of cell death, in this study, we address the role 
of  calpain  in  autophagy.  lc3  is  the  only  available  specifi c 
marker to detect autophagosomes in mammalian cells (kabeya 
et al., 2000).
 to directly tackle the question of whether calpain is re-
quired in autophagy, we analyzed endogenous lc3 in response 
to ceramide and rapamycin by means of immunofl uorescence 
in  wild-type  and  capns1−/−  mouse  embryonic  fi broblasts 
(mefs). capns1−/− mefs, which are also known as calpain 
4−/− mefs, were derived from capns1 (calpain 4) knockout 
mice  and  were  shown  to  lack  calpain  activity  (arthur  et  al., 
2000).  wild-type  and  capns1−/−  mefs  were  induced  with 
each  stimulus  for  3  h  or  were  left  untreated. afterward,  the 
cells were fi xed and subjected to immunofl uorescence analysis 
with an anti-lc3 antibody. as shown in fig. 1 a (top), wild-
type mefs are faintly labeled by anti-lc3 antibody and show 
a  clear  induction  of  autophagosome  formation  after  rapa-
mycin or ceramide treatment. on the other hand, capns1−/− 
mefs  show  a  higher  diffuse  background  that  does  not  sub-
stantially  vary  after  stimulation  with  rapamycin  or  ceramide 
(fig. 1 a, bottom).
in  a  parallel  experiment,  rapamycin  and  ceramide  were 
used to stimulate wild-type and capns1−/− mefs, and the 
 lysates were analyzed by western blotting to detect both cyto-
plasmic  lc3-i  and  its  proteolytic  derivative  lc3-ii  that  pref-
erentially  associates  with  autophagosomal  membranes  (kabeya 
et al., 2004). in agreement with the immunofl uorescence data, 
both rapamycin and ceramide trigger an increase of lc3ii with 
respect to lc3i in wild-type cells, whereas the ratio between 
the two lc3 forms is not considerably altered by both stimuli in 
capns1−/− mefs (fig. 1 b).
the  fate  of  endogenous  lc3  upon  autophagy  induction 
was  also  addressed  in  human  u2os  cells.  u2os  cells  were 
transfected with a scrambled sirna (sirna control) or with a 
capns1-specifi c sirna. 72 h later, autophagy was induced by 
a 3-h incubation with ceramide, and the cells were either fi xed 
and analyzed by immunofl uorescence or lysed and subjected to 
western blot analysis. as shown in fig. 2 a, capns1 depletion 
prevents the formation of bona-fi de autophagosomes upon in-
duction with ceramide. accordingly, the increase in the endoge-
nous membrane-bound lc3ii after ceramide treatment is clearly 
defective after capns1 silencing (fig. 2 b).
calpain-deﬁ cient cells show a defect 
in lysosomal activation and long-lived 
protein degradation
to further assess the requirement of calpain for the autophagic 
process, we followed the increase of lysosomal activity occurring 
figure 3.  lysosomal induction and long-lived protein degrada-
tion  are  hampered  in  capns1-deﬁ cient  mefs.  wild-type  and 
capns1 mefs were incubated with the stimuli indicated, namely 
rapamycin (rapa), etoposide (et), ebss (ebs), serum-free medium 
(sf), and ceramide (cera), in the presence or absence of 3ma and 
were trypsinized, stained with lysotracker green, and analyzed 
by facs. (a–d) representative facs proﬁ les obtained after lyso-
tracker staining of wild-type and capns1−/− mefs before and 
after  rapamycin  treatment.  the  gate  set  between  101  and  102 
separates the cells with high ﬂ uorescence from the background 
population. (e–g) the histograms report the percentage of cells 
with  high  lysotracker  staining  and  represent  the  mean  values 
 obtained  in  four  independent  experiments.  (h  and  i)  wild-type 
and capns1−/− mefs were grown for 4 h in amino acid–free 
medium (h) or in serum-free medium (i) in the presence or absence 
of  the  autophagy  inhibitor  3ma,  and,  subsequently,  long-lived 
protein degradation was scored as the percentage of tca-soluble 
counts  on  total  radioactivity  in  a  standard  protein  degradation 
 assay. the histograms report the mean values obtained in four inde-
pendent experiments. error bars represent sd. ssc, side scatter.
calpain is required for macroautophagy • demarchi et al.
597
published november 13, 2006
after  autophagy  induction  by  means  of  lysotracker  staining 
and facs analysis. wild-type and capns1−/− mefs were 
 incubated  with  rapamycin  for  24  h,  trypsinized,  stained  with 
lysotracker  green,  and  analyzed  by  facs.  the  results  ob-
tained  in  a  typical  experiment  are  reported  in  fig.  3  (a–d). 
a net increase in the percentage of cells that are highly labeled 
with  lysotracker  occurs  after  rapamycin  treatment  of  wild- 
type mefs (fig. 3 c) as compared with control untreated cells 
(fig. 3 a), clearly showing that rapamycin results in an increase 
in lysosomal activity. on the contrary, in capns1−/− mefs, 
rapamycin is ineffective in inducing an increase in lysotracker 
fl uorescence intensity (fig. 3, compare b with d). the mean 
values of the percentage of cells highly labeled by lysotracker 
obtained in four independent experiments are reported in fig. 3 e. 
to  determine  whether  the  increase  in  lysosomal  activity  was 
dependent on macroautophagy induction, 3-methyladenine (3ma) 
was added just before stimulation with rapamycin. 3ma clearly 
inhibits  the  increase  in  lysotracker  staining,  indicating  the 
specifi city of the induction (fig. 3 e). next, other autophagic 
stimuli,  namely  etoposide,  starvation  in  earle’s  balanced  salt 
solution  (ebss)  or  serum-free  medium,  and  ceramide,  were 
used to induce autophagy in wild-type and capns1−/− mefs 
using  the  same  type  of  assay. as  shown  in  fig.  3  f,  all  four 
stimuli  induce  autophagy-dependent  lysosomal  activation 
after  3  h  in  wild-type  mefs  but  not  in  capns1−/−  mefs; 
moreover,  the  increase  in  lysotracker  labeling  is  dramati-
cally reduced upon the addition of 3ma just before  induction 
(fig. 3 g).
to further investigate the requirement of calpain in auto-
phagy, we monitored long-lived protein degradation upon amino 
acid  starvation  both  in  wild-type  and  capns1−/−  mefs  ac-
cording  to  standard  protocols  (pattingre  et  al.,  2003). amino 
acid starvation induces an increase in bulk protein degradation 
in  both  cell  lines.  however,  such  an  increase  is  considerably 
lower  in  calpain-defi cient  cells  as  compared  with  wild-type 
cells (fig. 3 h). a reduction in protein degradation occurs in the 
presence of the inhibitor 3ma in both cell lines, indicating that 
although  considerably  reduced,  autophagy  may  still  occur  in 
capns1−/− mefs as a consequence of amino acid starvation. 
alternatively, this result might be caused by an effect of 3ma 
on alternative degradation pathways, as a similar effect is also 
observed  in  autophagy-defective  atg5−/−  cells  (mizushima 
et al., 2001). similar results were obtained by studying long-lived 
protein degradation upon serum starvation (fig. 3 i), confi rming 
the  importance  of  calpain  in  activating  protein  degradation 
through the autophagic process.
calpain is required for autophagosome 
formation in response to rapamycin
electron microscopy was used to directly analyze and quantify 
autophagosomes in wild-type and capns1−/− mefs grown in 
control serum-containing medium and after autophagy induc-
tion with rapamycin or amino acid–free medium (ebss). the 
morphology of early autophagic vacuole (av [avi]) and late av 
(avd) profi les of wild-type mefs are shown in fig. 4 (a and b, 
respectively). the quantitative results obtained are represented 
in fig. 4 c.
598
jcb • volume 175 • number 4 • 2006
figure 4.  autophagosome formation is hampered in capns1−/− mefs. 
(a  and  b)  the  electron  micrographs  show  the  ultrastructure  of  early  (a) 
and  late  autophagosomes  (b)  in  wild-type  mefs.  the  cell  area  on  the 
grid  squares  was  estimated  by  point  counting  using  negatives  taken  at 
600×. (c) quantiﬁ cation of autophagosomes in wild-type and capns1−/− 
mefs  (knockout)  grown  in  control  serum-containing  medium  (fcs)  or 
 induced for 3 h with ebss (ebs) or rapamycin (rap). error bars indi-
cate the  sem.  the  number  of  avi  and  avd  proﬁ les  was  counted 
under  the   microscope  at  12,000×  from  four  to  ﬁ ve  grid  squares  for 
each sample.
these electron microscopy experiments demonstrate that 
in capns1−/− mefs, autophagosome formation is completely 
abolished  in  response  to  rapamycin.  in  the  case  of  ebss-
 induced autophagy, capns1−/− mefs do show autophagosome 
formation  but  at  a  substantially  reduced  level  compared  with 
wild-type mefs. in this last case, as shown in fig. s2 (available 
at  http://www.jcb.org/cgi/content/full/jcb.200601024/dc1), 
the  morphology  of  the  autophagosomes  is  not  altered  in 
capns1−/− mefs with respect to wild-type mefs. this led 
us  to  conclude  that  the  mechanics  of  autophagosome  forma-
tion are still functional in capns1−/− mefs, however severely 
impaired  in  their  effi ciency.  the  diminished  accumulation  of 
autophagosomes  in  capns1−/−  mefs  maintained  in  ebss 
medium  may  therefore  suggest  that  the  dramatic  reprogram-
ming of cell functions occurring upon amino acid deprivation 
may also involve the activation of some autophagic pathways 
not  strictly  requiring  calpain  function.  alternatively,  because 
ebss  possibly  represents  a  stronger  and  broader  stimulus  in 
respect to rapamycin, residual calpain activity caused by some 
other calpain isoforms may be suffi cient to trigger autophagy, 
albeit at a reduced level.
this evidence prompted us to monitor tor activity in both 
cell lines before and after rapamycin treatment using s6 kinase 
phosphorylation as readout. the results shown in fig. s3 (avail-
able at http://www.jcb.org/cgi/content/full/jcb.200601024/dc1) 
clearly  indicate  that  tor  is  active  in  both  cell  lines,  where  it 
is  inhibited  with  similar  effi ciency  upon  rapamycin  addition. 
published november 13, 2006
further  studies  are  required  to  defi ne  the  key  regulatory  ele-
ments targeted by  calpain for the effi cient induction of auto-
phagosome formation.
ectopic lc3 constitutively forms discrete 
bodies in calpain-deﬁ cient mefs
a widely used method to study autophagy is monitoring the re-
distribution of the overexpressed autophagosome marker lc3 
from  a  mostly  diffused  localization  to  a  punctuated  pattern 
upon the addition of an autophagic stimulus. therefore, in par-
allel to the studies on endogenous lc3, we monitored autopha-
gosome formation after overexpressed gfp-lc3 localization 
in  wild-type  and  capns1−/−  mefs.  16  h  after  transfection, 
the cells were preincubated with the macroautophagy  inhibitor 
3ma  or  solvent  alone,  and  ceramide  was  added  for  3  h  to 
 induce autophagy (scarlatti et al., 2004). the cells were sub-
sequently fi xed to analyze overexpressed lc3 by fl uorescence 
microscopy. as  shown  in  fig.  5 a,  in  wild-type  mefs,  lc3 
produces  a  mostly  diffuse  staining  in  the  absence  of  stimulus 
and after 3ma treatment. after induction with ceramide, lc3 
accumulates  in  the  autophagosomes,  whose  formation  is  pre-
vented  by  3ma  pretreatment,  indicating  the  specifi city  of 
autophagy  induction.  however,  in  capns1−/−  mefs,  lc3 
accumulates  in  specifi c  bodies  even  under  basal  conditions; 
 incubation with the autophagy inhibitor 3ma in this case does 
not prevent the formation of lc3 spots. in addition, the num-
ber of cells with intensely stained bodies does not substantially 
increase after the addition of ceramide (fig. 5 b). each exper-
iment was repeated at least four times, obtaining  reproducible 
results. for each experiment, the percentage of cells with lc3 
bodies was counted, and the mean value ± sd is reported in 
the fi gure. at least 200 cells were analyzed for each indepen-
dent experiment.
to  further  monitor  autophagy  induction,  wild-type  and 
capns1−/− mefs overexpressing gfp-lc3 were challenged 
with several stimuli that were previously used to induce auto-
phagy, namely rapamycin (noda and ohsumi, 1998), amino 
acid–free medium (neely et al., 1977), serum starvation (pfeifer, 
1973),  and  etoposide  (shimizu  et  al.,  2004). all  of  the  treat-
ments triggered autophagosome formation in wild-type mefs 
(fig. 5 c) while leaving unchanged the lc3 staining pattern in 
capns1−/− mefs (not depicted). altogether, these results fur-
ther suggest that autophagy is impaired in cells lacking calpain 
activity,  where  overexpressed  lc3  constitutively  accumulates 
into specifi c bodies.
calpain silencing is coupled 
to the accumulation of overexpressed 
lc3 in human cells
to verify whether the constitutive accumulation of ectopic lc3 
into the observed specifi c bodies in capns1−/− mefs was 
a peculiarity of the cell line used or a consequence of calpain in-
activation, we monitored the effect of calpain silencing by sirna 
on autophagosome formation in the human osteosarcoma cell 
line u2os. an atg5-specifi c sirna that has been previously 
described (boya et al., 2005) was used as a tool to prevent auto-
phagy, allowing the distinction between true autophagosomes 
figure 5.  ectopic lc3 constitutively accumulates in vesicles in capns1−/− 
mefs. (a–c) wild-type (a and c) and capns1−/− mefs (b) were trans-
fected with gfp-rlc3, and, 16 h later, the cells were treated for 3 h with 
the stimuli indicated. afterward, the cells were ﬁ xed and analyzed by ﬂ uo-
rescence microscopy. representative ﬁ elds are shown. the different pat-
terns of gfp-lc3 distribution were scored in 250 transfected cells for at 
least three independent experiments. the mean of the percentage of cells 
with intensely stained bodies and relative sd are indicated beneath each 
image. bar, 20 μm.
and other undefi ned structures containing ectopic lc3. u2os 
cells were transfected with a scrambled sirna (sirna control) 
or with a capns1-specifi c sirna in combination with atg5 
sirna or an ineffective sirna as a control.
48 h later, the cells were transfected with gfp-lc3, and, 
after an additional 16 h, autophagy was induced by a 3-h incu-
bation with ceramide. the fi xed cells were fi nally analyzed by 
fl uorescence microscopy. as shown in fig. 6 a, lc3 appears 
diffuse  in  control  u2os  cells  and,  after  induction  with  cera-
mide, becomes associated with autophagosomes, which are not 
formed  by  specifi cally  inhibiting  autophagy  through  atg5 
sirna. on the other hand, capns1-silenced u2os cells show 
lc3-positive  bodies  in  the  absence  of  stimulation,  and  the 
 distribution of gfp-lc3 is not altered by atg5 silencing. in 
 addition, the lc3 staining pattern is not considerably affected 
by ceramide (fig. 6 b).
to mark and analyze the lc3 pattern specifi cally in the 
cells where capns1 is silenced, we developed an sicapns1-
gfp p-superior plasmid (sicapns1-gfp) allowing the simul-
taneous expression of capns1 sirna and gfp. in parallel, we 
produced  a  u2os-derivative  cell  line  expressing  hcred-lc3 
(u2os-lc3)  as  a  tool  to  study  autophagy  induction.  u2os-
lc3 cells were transfected with a control vector (sicontrol-gfp) 
or with sicapns1-gfp plasmid; after 48 h, they were stimu-
lated or left unstimulated with ceramide for 3 h and were fi xed 
and analyzed by fl uorescence microscopy.
as  shown  in  fig.  6  c,  in  the  cells  transfected  with  the 
control  plasmid,  hcred-lc3  appears  diffuse  before  induc-
tion and  forms  autophagosomes  after  ceramide  treatment  as 
 expected. however, sicapns1-gfp–transfected cells show a 
punctuated lc3 pattern both in the presence and absence of ce-
ramide stimulation. collectively, the data obtained in u2os cells 
are in agreement with the data obtained comparing wild-type 
calpain is required for macroautophagy • demarchi et al.
599
published november 13, 2006
figure 6.  ectopic lc3 forms speciﬁ c bodies in capns1-depleted human 
cells. (a and b) u2os cells were silenced with a control sirna (a) or with 
a capns1 sirna (b) in combination with a control sirna or atg5 sirna 
as indicated. after 48 h, the cells were transfected with gfp-hlc3 and, 16 h 
later, were incubated for 3 h with ceramide or solvent alone as a negative 
control.  they  were  subsequently  ﬁ xed  and  analyzed  by  ﬂ uorescence 
 microscopy. representative ﬁ elds are shown. (c and d) a u2os-derivative 
cell  line  stably  expressing  hcred-hlc3  (u2os-lc3)  was  established. 
u2os-lc3 cells were transfected with si-control-gfp (c) or sicapns1-gfp (d) 
expression vectors and, 48 h later, were either treated with ceramide 
or with solvent alone for 3 h as indicated. finally, the cells were ﬁ xed and 
analyzed by ﬂ uorescence microscopy. the different patterns of gfp-lc3 
distribution were scored in 250 transfected cells for at least three indepen-
dent experiments. bar, 20 μm.
with  capns1−/−  mefs,  demonstrating  that  in  capns1-
 depleted  cells,  overexpressed  lc3  accumulates  in  specifi c 
bodies independently of autophagy induction.
ectopic lc3 bodies constitutively present 
in capns1-depleted cells are enriched 
in endosome markers
to  investigate  the  identity  of  lc3-containing  structures  in 
capns1-depleted  cells,  we  analyzed  whether  overexpressed 
lc3 would eventually colocalize with specifi c endosomal mark-
ers both in control and in capns1-silenced u2os-lc3 cells. 
48 h after silencing with control or capns1 sirna, autophagy 
was induced by ceramide together with pepstatin to inhibit lyso-
somal activity and freeze any eventual transient colocalization 
event. thereafter, the cells were fi xed and subjected to immuno-
fl uorescence against the markers lamp-2, eea1, and trans-
ferrin receptor and were analyzed by a confocal microscope. 
representative images are shown in fig. 7. the colocalization 
of lc3 with the endosomal markers was quantifi ed using imagej 
software (colocalizer plug-in). the pearson correlation coeffi -
cient (r) is reported near each merged image. altogether, the 
data  indicate  that  overexpressed  lc3  bodies  are  enriched  in 
 endosome markers specifi cally in calpain-depleted cells.
600
jcb • volume 175 • number 4 • 2006
figure  7.  ectopic  lc3  bodies  are  enriched  with  endosome  markers  in 
capns1-depleted cells. (a–c) u2os-lc3 cells were silenced with a control 
sirna or a capns1 sirna as indicated and, 48 h later, were stimulated 
for 3 h with ceramide to induce macroautophagy. pepstatin a was added 
to inhibit lysosomal activity and freeze any colocalization event between 
lc3 vesicles and lysosomes. subsequently, the cells were ﬁ xed, decorated 
with anti–lamp-2 (a), anti-eea1 (b), and antitransferrin receptor (tr; c), 
and  analyzed  by  confocal  microscopy.  images  of  representative  ﬁ elds 
were taken. the pearson’s correlation coefﬁ cient, r, is reported for each 
merge image. bars, 20 μm.
to precisely defi ne the identity of the lc3-positive bod-
ies that accumulate in calpain-defi cient cells, immunoelectron 
 microcopy  studies  were  performed.  u2os  cells  were  trans-
fected  with  gfp-lc3  and  sirna  specifi c  for  capns1  as 
 described in the fi rst section of results and were fi xed in pfa. 
double  labeling  with  gfp  and  lamp-2  antibodies  allowed 
us to detect gfp-lc3 bodies and also mark endosomes in the 
same experiment. as expected, gfp-lc3 partly accumulates in 
specifi c  bodies,  as  shown  in  fig.  8  (a  and  b). the  gold  par-
ticles indicating the presence of gfp-lc3 bodies (fig. 8, large 
gold  dots)  were  associated  with  endosome-like  structures, 
some of which were also positive for lamp-2 (fig. 8; small 
gold dots are indicated by arrowheads). the morphology and 
lamp-2 labeling pattern of gfp-lc3 structures corresponded 
to that of early endosome-like vesicles, clearly confi rming that 
gfp-lc3 bodies accumulating in capns1-depleted cells are 
not autophagosomes.
published november 13, 2006
the calpain-dependent impairment 
of autophagy sensitizes cells to apoptosis
we  have  previously  reported  that  ceramide  triggers  apoptosis 
and induces an nf-κb–dependent prosurvival pathway through 
calpain. accordingly, in calpain-defi cient cells, apoptosis is 
 enhanced (demarchi et al., 2005). in this study, we have demon-
strated that calpain is required to induce autophagy in response 
to ceramide, etoposide, and amino acid or serum starvation. 
 recent studies indicate the existence of a negative cross-regulation 
between autophagy and apoptosis (yu et al., 2004; boya et al., 
2005; takacs-vellai et al., 2005). however, there are examples 
of a mutual requirement between the two pathways (camougrand 
et  al.,  2003;  martin  and  baehrecke,  2004).  therefore,  we 
 decided  to  defi ne  the  effect  of  the  calpain-related  autophagy 
block  on  apoptosis  induction  in  the  cellular  systems  used  for 
this study.
wild-type  and  capns1−/−  mefs  were  incubated  with 
the  autophagy  inducers  etoposide,  ceramide,  serum-free  me-
dium, ebss, or vinblastine for 20 h. afterward, the cells were 
double labeled with annexin v and propidium iodide (pi) and 
were analyzed by facs. the results obtained in a typical ex-
periment of ebss induction are reported in fig. 9 (a–d). the 
histogram presented in fig. 9 e summarizes the results of four 
independent experiments for each specifi c stimulus. a dramatic 
increase in apoptosis can be seen in calpain-defi cient cells after 
induction with all of the stimuli, with the exception of vinblastine. 
vinblastine is a microtubule-depolymerizing agent, and, although 
it can trigger an autophagic response, it has inhibitory functions 
on late autophagic events (punnonen and reunanen, 1990). 
 interestingly, we have previously reported that the toxicity of 
taxol, an indirect inhibitor of autophagy by virtue of its block of 
microtubule depolymerization, is almost comparable in wild-type 
and capns1−/− mefs (demarchi et al., 2005). collectively, 
the aforementioned data highlight the cytoprotective potential 
of autophagy in mefs and strongly argue for a strict correlation 
between the impairment of autophagy in  calpain-defi cient cells 
and induction of the apoptotic switch.
to further confi rm this hypothesis, a similar approach was 
followed using human u2os cells silenced either with atg5, 
capns1-specifi c sirna, or a combination of the two. 48 h af-
ter silencing, the cells were shifted to amino acid–free medium 
and incubated for a further 20 h to trigger autophagy. cell death 
was then quantifi ed by means of pi and annexin staining fol-
lowed by facs analysis. fig. 10 (a–f) presents the results of 
figure  8.  gfp-lc3  bodies  in  capns1-depleted  cells  are 
 endosome-like structures. representative immunoelectron micro-
scopy micro photographs showing the ultrastructure of gfp-lc3 
bodies in capns1-depleted u2os cells. large gold dots mark 
gfp-positive structures, whereas small gold dots (indicated by 
arrowheads) are labeled with anti–lamp-2.
a representative experiment and indicates that both atg5 and 
capns1 silencing sensitize u2os cells to apoptosis induced 
by amino acid starvation. the mean values obtained in four in-
dependent experiments are reported in fig. 10 g. the effect of 
capns1 silencing is the most severe, suggesting that capns1 
depletion  in  addition  to  the  block  of  autophagy  also  prevents 
other  antiapoptotic  mechanisms  such  as  nf-κb  activation 
(demarchi et al., 2005).
discussion
in this study, we demonstrate that calpain regulates macroauto-
phagy in two cellular systems lacking calpain activity: mefs 
derived  from  capns1  knockout  mice  and  capns1-silenced 
figure 9.  capns1−/− mefs are more sensitive to apoptosis. (a–d) wild-
type and capns1−/− mefs were treated with etoposide (et), ceramide 
(cera), ebss, serum-free medium (sf), and vinblastine (vin) or left in control 
medium (cont) for 20 h and stained with pi and annexin v–fitc. a set of 
representative experiments with ebss is shown. the cells in the bottom right 
quadrant were scored as apoptotic. (e) the mean values obtained in four 
independent experiments with all of the stimuli. error bars represent sd.
calpain is required for macroautophagy • demarchi et al.
601
published november 13, 2006
figure 10.  depletion of capns1 results in increased apoptosis in human 
cells.  u2os  cells  were  transfected  with  a  sirna  speciﬁ c  for  capns1, 
atg5, or a combination of the two. an ineffective sirna was used as a 
negative control. 48 h later, the cells were shifted to amino acid–free me-
dium for an additional 20 h, stained with pi and annexin-fitc, and ana-
lyzed by facs. (a–f) results of a set of representative experiments. (g) the 
mean of the values obtained in four independent experiments. bars indi-
cate the percentage of annexin-positive cells with high (h) pi staining (top 
right quadrant in a–f) and low (l) pi staining (bottom right quadrant in a–f). 
error bars represent sem.
human cells. in addition, we shed some light on the relationship 
between apoptosis and autophagy.
calpains are activated by several stimuli that trigger macro-
autophagy, including starvation (gomez-vicente et al., 2005), 
ceramide (tanabe et al., 1998; demarchi et al., 2005), etoposide 
(varghese et al., 2001), and arsenic trioxide ( karlsson et al., 
2004). milli- and microcalpain, which both require capns1 for 
activity, are localized at the endoplasmic reticulum and golgi, 
where  the  autophagic  machinery  works  (kihara  et  al.,  2001; 
pattingre et al., 2005).
in both calpain-null systems used in this study, defi cient 
autophagy was shown by four different approaches: analysis of 
exogenous  and  endogenous  lc3  by  immunofl uorescence  and 
western blotting, quantifi cation of lysosomal induction, long-
lived  protein  degradation  assays,  and  electron  microscopy. 
 altogether, the data presented indicate that in capns1-defi cient 
cells, the autophagic program is not effi ciently activated. as a 
result of this defect, capns1-defi cient cells are more sensitive 
to  apoptosis  induced  by  several  autophagic  stimuli,  including 
ceramide, etoposide, and starvation.
in light of our fi ndings connecting calpain and auto phagy, 
it  will  be  interesting  to  investigate  this  relationship  in  vivo 
under physiological and pathological conditions as well as in 
response to chemotherapy. previously reported data lend sup-
port to such a possibility. the dual role of autophagy has been 
602
jcb • volume 175 • number 4 • 2006
seen during cancer progression, where, at the initial stages, auto-
phagy prevents tumor growth (liang et al., 1999), whereas at 
advanced stages, it might favor tumor cell survival (paglin et al., 
2001). an example of this is calpain 9, which appears to be a 
 tumor suppressor of gastric cancer, whereas calpain activation 
has been shown to be involved in cell transformation and invasion 
(carragher and frame, 2002; xu and deng, 2004).
most  interestingly,  this  parallel  is  maintained  in  other 
 degenerative  pathologies.  autophagy  is  protective  during  the 
initial stages of neurodegeneration (webb et al., 2003; ravikumar 
et al., 2004), whereas it becomes deleterious at later stages (yue 
et al., 2002). a similar dual role could be played by calpain in 
neuronal diseases, where it may be protective at the initial stages 
of neurodegeneration (kim et al., 2003) and  hyperactivated and 
detrimental at advanced stages (park and ferreira, 2005). a de-
tailed  investigation  of  the  molecular  cross  talk  between  these 
two systems in living organisms might be instrumental for per-
forming appropriate strategies of mole cular intervention.
the precise molecular network linking autophagy, apop-
tosis, and other types of cell death is still unresolved (assuncao 
guimaraes  and  linden,  2004;  kroemer  and  jaattela,  2005). 
 autophagy is protective against low radiation damage (paglin 
et al., 2001) and against mutant huntingtin-induced cell death 
(bjorkoy  et  al.,  2005);  it  is  essential  for  maintaining  cell 
 survival  after  growth  factor  withdrawal  in  bax−/−bak−/−  cells 
(lum et al., 2005). furthermore, the inhibition of macroauto-
phagy  triggers  apoptosis  (boya  et  al.,  2005;  gonzalez-polo 
et al., 2005). on the other hand, autophagy is coupled to cell 
death  in  bax−/−bak−/−  mefs  (shimizu  et  al.,  2004)  and  in 
tamoxifen-treated mcf7 cells (bursch et al., 2000). in addition, 
autophagy and apoptosis are positively interconnected in sev-
eral  systems,  including  drosophila  development  (baehrecke, 
2003), rat retinal tissue development (guimaraes et al., 2003), 
and  peripheral  nerves  of  adult  rats  after  damage  (xue  et  al., 
1999). collectively, our data further support the argument that 
macroautophagy is a survival strategy activated both in response 
to  serum  and  amino  acid  deprivation.  in  addition,  we  have 
shown that macroautophagy is activated and also plays a protec-
tive role upon treatment with specifi c drugs, such as etoposide 
and  ceramide;  thus,  the  knockdown  of  autophagy  could  be  a 
strategy for improving chemotherapy protocols.
ectopic  lc3  is  a  powerful  tool  to  study  autophagy 
 (kabeya et al., 2000). in this study, we confi rmed that in mefs 
and  u2os  human  osteosarcoma  cells,  the  formation  of  lc3 
 autophagosomes  is  effi ciently  inhibited  by  treatment  with  the 
 autophagy inhibitor 3ma and by sirna-mediated depletion of 
the essential autophagy gene atg5, respectively. however, in 
capns1−/− mefs and sicapns1-depleted cells, we observed 
that ectopic lc3 constitutively accumulates in the absence of 
any  specifi c  autophagic  stimulus  into  cytoplasmic  endosome-
like  bodies  enriched  with  endosomal  markers.  therefore,  we 
hypothesize  that  such  lc3  bodies  could  represent  a  default 
or salvage  lysosomal  pathway  for  protein  degradation  with 
slower clearance kinetics, which becomes manifest in a calpain-
 defi cient cellular context. a similar pathway may be predicted 
for the endogenous proteins that accumulate in diseases coupled 
to autophagy defects.
published november 13, 2006
further studies are required to analyze the detailed mech-
anisms involving calpains in the formation of autophagosomes 
and  in  lysosomal-mediated  protein  degradation  pathways. 
given  the  strategic  localization  of  milli-  and  microcalpain  at 
the endoplasmic reticulum, it would be tempting to speculate 
that calpain may play a role in the delivery of membranes to 
the autophagosome. alternatively, calpain could modulate one 
or more key components of the signaling networks, ultimately 
leading  to  autophagosome  formation.  the  complete  block 
of  autophagosome  formation  occurring  in  rapamycin-treated 
capns1−/− mefs favors such a possibility.
materials and methods
chemicals and reagents
c2 ceramide, baﬁ lomycin, pepstatin a, 3ma, rapamycin, and etoposide 
were purchased from sigma-aldrich. lipofectamine reagent and oligo-
fectamine  were  purchased  from  invitrogen.  smartpool  for  capns1  si-
lencing was obtained from dharmacon. micro- and millicalpain sirnas 
were purchased from santa cruz biotechnology, inc.
plasmids and constructs
hcred-hlc3 and pgfp-hlc3 were constructed by inserting human lc3 in 
hcred and pgfp plasmid, respectively. the plasmid pgfp-rlc3 was a gift 
from  t.  yoshimori  (national  institute  of  genetics,  shizuoka,  japan).  the 
plasmid  sicapns1-gfp  was  obtained  by  subcloning  a  double-stranded 
 oligonucleotide containing a sequence complementary to capns1 sirna 
into commercial p-superior–gfp plasmid according to the manufacturer’s 
instructions. all constructs were checked by sequence analysis.
cell culture
wild-type and capns1−/− mefs (dourdin et al., 2001) were gifts from 
p.a. greer (queen’s university, kingston, ontario, canada). u2os cells 
and  the  aforementioned  mouse  ﬁ broblasts  were  grown  in  dme  supple-
mented with 10% fcs.
immunological procedures and quantiﬁ cations
standard  protocols  for  immunoblotting  and  immunoﬂ uorescence  were 
used.  rabbit  serum  raised  against  lc3  was  provided  by  t.  yoshimori. 
monoclonal antibody against lamp-2 was purchased from bd  biosciences. 
lamp-1–speciﬁ c antibody was purchased from santa cruz  biotechnology, 
inc., and monoclonal anti-capns1 was purchased from sigma-aldrich. 
monoclonal  antitransferrin  receptor  (okt9)  was  previously  described 
(sutherland  et  al.,  1981).  band  quantiﬁ cation  from  western  blots  was 
performed  using  the  image  1.63.sea  program  (scion).  secondary  anti-
bodies for immunoﬂ uorescence were fitc conjugated, and the cells were 
mounted using mowiol medium. analysis and acquisition were performed 
using a confocal laser-scanning microscope (axiovert 100 m; carl zeiss 
microimaging, inc.) with a 63× na 1.25 or 100× na 1.30 oil objec-
tive (leica) at room temperature. images were imported using lsm-510 
software  (carl  zeiss  microimaging,  inc.).  imagej  software  (national 
 institutes  of  health)  was  used  to  quantify  the  colocalization  observed 
by immunoﬂ uorescence.
transfection
stable transfections of u2os cells with hcred-lc3 were performed by the 
calcium phosphate method using standard procedures. u2os, capns1−/−, 
and  control  mouse  ﬁ broblasts  at  60–80%  conﬂ uency  were  transiently 
transfected or oligofected using fugene (roche) or oligofectamine (life 
technologies) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
statistical analysis
results are expressed as means ± sd of at least three independent experi-
ments performed in triplicate or quadruplicate unless indicated otherwise. 
statistical analysis was performed using a t test, with the level of signiﬁ -
cance set at p < 0.05.
trypsinized, resuspended in phenol-free dme, 10% fcs, and 75 nm lyso-
tracker green, incubated for 30 min at 37°c, and analyzed with the cell-
quest program (bd biosciences) by facscalibur (becton dickinson).
protein degradation assay
cells were labeled in complete medium in the presence of [14c]valine for 
18 h, washed, and incubated with cold medium for 1 h to allow the degra-
dation of short-lived proteins. then, after extensive washing, the medium 
was replaced with ebss for 4 h in the presence or absence of 10 mm 
3ma. finally, the proteins were precipitated with tca, and radioactivity 
was measured. protein degradation was calculated as the percentage of 
tca-soluble counts on total radioactivity.
electron microscopy
monolayers were ﬁ xed in 2% glutaraldehyde in 0.2 m hepes, ph 7.4, for 
2 h and were scraped off the dish during ﬁ xation. the pellets were embed-
ded in epon using routine procedures. approximately 60-nm sections were 
cut and stained using uranyl acetate and lead citrate and were examined 
with an electron microscope (jem 1200exii; jeol). the number of avi and 
avd proﬁ les was counted under the microscope by systematically screen-
ing the sections at 12,000× using grid squares as sampling units, as previ-
ously described (eskelinen et al., 2004).
all avs occurring in the grid were recorded. the area of cells on 
each  grid  square  was  estimated  by  point  counting  using  photographic 
negatives taken at 600×. four to ﬁ ve grid squares were screened for each 
sample. the number of vacuoles per cell area was then counted for each 
grid square separately.
for immunogold electron microscopy, u2os cells were ﬁ xed in 4% 
pfa in 0.2 m hepes, ph 7.4, for 2 h at room temperature and were further 
processed as previously described (eskelinen et al., 2002). the cell sec-
tions  were  analyzed  by  immunogold  electron  microscopy  with  rabbit 
anti-gfp and mouse anti–lamp-2 antibodies followed by the secondary 
antibodies goat anti–rabbit conjugated to 10 nm gold and goat anti–mouse 
coupled to 5 nm gold.
annexin v and pi staining and facs analysis
translocation of phosphatidylserine to the cell surface was monitored by 
using  an  annexin  v–fitc  apoptosis  detection  kit  (sigma-aldrich).  cells 
were  trypsinized,  washed  in  pbs,  and  resuspended  in  binding  buffer 
(10 mm hepes/naoh, ph 7.4, 140 mm nacl, and 2.5 mm cacl2). cell 
density was adjusted to 2–5 × 105 cells/ml. 1 μl of recombinant human 
annexin v–fitc/a and 2 μl pi were added to 100 μl of cell suspension; 
the mixture was brieﬂ y mixed and incubated for 10 min at room tempera-
ture in the dark. afterward, 400 μl of binding buffer was added to the cells 
that were then analyzed by facscan (becton dickinson). 15,000 events 
were collected in list mode fashion, stored, and analyzed by cellquest 
software (bd biosciences).
online supplemental material
fig. s1 shows that the depletion of microcalpain impairs  macroauto phagy. 
fig.  s2  shows  that  the  ﬁ ne  ultrastructure  of  autophagosomes  is  not  al-
tered  in  capns1−/−  mefs.  fig.  s3  shows  that  rapamycin  inhibits  tor 
activity in wild-type and capns1−/− mefs. fig. s4 shows that lc3ii is 
associated  with  membranes  in  capns1−/−  mefs.  fig.  s5  shows  that 
the induction of lysotracker-labeled bodies is reduced in capns1−/− mefs. 
online  supplemental  material  is  available  at  http://www.jcb.org/cgi/
content/full/jcb.200601024/dc1.
we are grateful to stefania marzinotto for technical support, peter greer for 
providing capns1−/− (calpain 4−/−) mefs, and tamotzu yoshimori for the 
gifts  of  anti-lc3  antibody  and  gfp-rlc3  plasmid.  we  thank  francesca  
scarlatti (s. paolo medical school, milan, italy) and patrice codogno (institut 
national de la santé et de la recherche médicale, villejuif, france) for providing 
protocols  and  useful  suggestions  and  georgine  faulkner  (the  international 
centre for genetic engineering and biotechnology [icgeb], trieste, italy) for 
critically revising the manuscript. we are grateful to mauro giacca (icgeb) 
for access to facs and the confocal microscope.
this work was supported by grants airc 1214, miur firb2001, and 
miur prin2004 to c. schneider. c. bertoli is a recipient of a fellowship from 
firc. t. copetti is a student at the international school for advanced studies 
(trieste, italy).
lysotracker labeling and quantiﬁ cation
to label lysosomes, lysotracker green (invitrogen) was used at a ﬁ nal con-
centration of 75 nm. the cells induced for 3 or 24 h with the stimuli were 
submitted: 5 january 2006
accepted: 13 october 2006
calpain is required for macroautophagy • demarchi et al.
603
published november 13, 2006
references
arthur,  j.s.,  j.s.  elce,  c.  hegadorn,  k.  williams,  and  p.a.  greer.  2000. 
disruption of the murine calpain small subunit gene, capn4: calpain is 
essential for embryonic development but not for cell growth and division. 
mol. cell. biol. 20:4474–4481.
assuncao  guimaraes,  c.,  and  r.  linden.  2004.  programmed  cell  deaths. 
apoptosis and alternative deathstyles. eur. j. biochem. 271:1638–1650.
baehrecke,  e.h.  2003.  autophagic  programmed  cell  death  in  drosophila. 
cell death differ. 10:940–945.
benetti, r., g. del sal, m. monte, g. paroni, c. brancolini, and c. schneider. 
2001. the death substrate gas2 binds m-calpain and increases suscepti-
bility to p53-dependent apoptosis. embo j. 20:2702–2714.
bhatt, a., i. kaverina, c. otey, and a. huttenlocher. 2002. regulation of focal 
complex composition and disassembly by the calcium-dependent protease 
calpain. j. cell sci. 115:3415–3425.
bjorkoy,  g.,  t.  lamark, a.  brech,  h.  outzen,  m.  perander, a.  overvatn,  h. 
stenmark, and t. johansen. 2005. p62/sqstm1 forms protein aggregates 
degraded by autophagy and has a protective effect on huntingtin-induced 
cell death. j. cell biol. 171:603–614.
boya,  p.,  r.a.  gonzalez-polo,  n.  casares,  j.l.  perfettini,  p.  dessen,  n. 
larochette,  d.  metivier,  d.  meley,  s.  souquere,  t.  yoshimori,  et  al. 
2005. inhibition of macroautophagy triggers apoptosis. mol. cell. biol. 
25:1025–1040.
bursch, w., k. hochegger, l. torok, b. marian, a. ellinger, and r.s. hermann. 
2000. autophagic and apoptotic types of programmed cell death exhibit 
different fates of cytoskeletal fi laments. j. cell sci. 113:1189–1198.
camougrand,  n.,  a.  grelaud-coq,  e.  marza,  m.  priault,  j.j.  bessoule,  and 
s.  manon.  2003.  the  product  of  the  uth1  gene,  required  for  bax-
 induced  cell  death  in  yeast,  is  involved  in  the  response  to  rapamycin. 
mol. microbiol. 47:495–506.
carragher, n.o., and m.c. frame. 2002. calpain: a role in cell transformation 
and migration. int. j. biochem. cell biol. 34:1539–1543.
demarchi,  f.,  c.  bertoli,  p.a.  greer,  and  c.  schneider.  2005.  ceramide 
triggers  an  nf-κb-dependent  survival  pathway  through  calpain. 
cell death differ. 12:512–522.
dewitt, s., and m.b. hallett. 2002. cytosolic free ca(2+) changes and calpain 
activation are required for β integrin-accelerated phagocytosis by human 
neutrophils. j. cell biol. 159:181–189.
dourdin,  n., a.k.  bhatt,  p.  dutt,  p.a.  greer,  c.h.  graham,  j.s. arthur,  j.s. 
elce, and a. huttenlocher. 2001. reduced cell migration and disruption 
of  the  actin  cytoskeleton  in  calpain-defi cient  embryonic  fi broblasts. 
j. biol. chem. 276:48382–48384.
eskelinen,  e.l.,  a.l.  illert,  y.  tanaka,  g.  schwarzmann,  j.  blanz,  k.  von 
figura, and p. saftig. 2002. role of lamp-2 in lysosome biogenesis and 
 auto phagy. mol. biol. cell. 13:3355–3368.
eskelinen,  e.l.,  c.k.  schmidt,  s.  neu,  m.  willenborg,  g.  fuertes, 
n.  salvador, y. tanaka,  r.  lullmann-raucht,  d.  hartman,  j.  heeren, 
et  al.  2004.  disturbed  cholesterol  traffi c  but  normal  proteolytic  func-
tion in lamp-1/lamp-2 double-defi cient fi broblasts. mol. biol. cell. 
15:3132–3135.
ghidoni,  r.,  j.j.  houri, a.  giuliani,  e.  ogier-denis,  e.  parolari,  s.  botti,  c. 
bauvy, and p. codogno. 1996. the metabolism of sphingo(glyco)lipids 
is  correlated  with  the  differentiation-dependent  autophagic  pathway  in 
ht-29 cells. eur. j. biochem. 237:454–459.
goll,  d.e.,  v.f.  thompson,  h.  li,  w.  wei,  and  j.  cong.  2003.  the  calpain 
 system. physiol. rev. 83:731–780.
gomez-vicente, v.,  m.  donovan,  and t.g.  cotter.  2005.  multiple  death  path-
ways in retina-derived 661w cells following growth factor deprivation: 
crosstalk between caspases and calpains. cell death differ. 12:796–804.
gonzales-polo, r.a., p. boya, a.l. pauleau, a. jalil, n. larochette, s. souquere, 
e.l. eskelinen, g. pierron, p. saftig, and g. kroemer. 2005. the apoptosis/
autophagy  paradox:  autophagic  vacuolization  before  apoptotic  death. 
j. cell sci. 118:3091–3102.
guimaraes,  c.a.,  m.  benchimol,  g.p.  amarante-mendes,  and  r.  linden. 
alternative programs of cell death in developing retinal tissue. 2003. 
j. biol. chem. 278:41938–41946.
hayashi, m., y. koshihara, h. ishibashi, s. yamamoto, s. tsubuki, t.c. saido, s. 
kawashima, and m. inomata. 2005. involvement of calpain in  osteoclastic 
bone resorption. j. biochem. (tokyo). 137:331–338.
hood, j.l., w.h. brook, and t.l. roszman. 2004. differential compartmental-
ization of the calpain/calpastatin network with the endoplasmic reticulum 
and golgi apparatus. j. biol. chem. 279:43126–43135.
ichimura, y., t.  kirisako, t. takao, y.  satomi, y.  shimonishi,  n.  ishihara,  n. 
mizushima, i. tanida, e. kominami, m. ohsumi, et al. 2000. a ubiquitin-
like system mediates protein lipidation. nature. 408:488–492.
kabeya, y.,  n.  mizushima,  t.  ueno, a. yamamoto,  t.  kirisako,  t.  noda,  e. 
kominami,  y.  ohsumi,  and  t.  yoshimori.  2000.  lc3,  a  mammalian 
homologue of yeast apg8p, is localized in autophagosome membranes 
after processing. embo j. 19:5720–5728.
kabeya, y.,  n.  mizushima,  a. yamamoto,  s.  oshitani-okamoto, y.  ohsumi, 
and t. yoshimori. 2004. lc3, gabarap and gate16 localize to auto-
phagosomal  membrane  depending  on  form-ii  formation.  j.  cell  sci. 
117:2805–2812.
kanzawa,  t., y.  kondo,  h.  ito,  s.  kondo,  and  i.  germano.  2003.  induction 
of  auto phagic  cell  death  in  malignant  glioma  cells  by  arsenic  trioxide. 
cancer res. 63:2103–2108.
karlsson, j., i. porn-ares, and s. pahlman. 2004. arsenic trioxide-induced death 
of neuroblastoma cells involves activation of bax and does not require 
p53. clin. cancer res. 10:3179–3188.
kihara,  a., y.  kabeya, y.  ohsumi,  and  t. yoshimori.  2001.  beclin-phospha-
tidylinositol  3-kinase  complex  functions  at  the  trans-golgi  network. 
embo rep. 2:330–335.
kim, s.j., j.y. sung, j.w. um, n. hattori, y. mizuno, k. tanaka, s.r. paik, j. kim, 
and k.c. chung. 2003. parkin cleaves intracellular alpha-synuclein inclu-
sions via the activation of calpain. j. biol. chem. 278:41890–41899.
klionsky, d.j. 2005. autophagy. curr. biol. 15:r282–r283.
klionsky, d.j., and y. ohsumi. 1999. vacuolar import of proteins and organelles 
from the cytoplasm. annu. rev. cell dev. biol. 15:1–32.
kroemer,  g.,  and  m.  jaattela.  2005.  lysosomes  and  autophagy  in  cell  death 
 control. nat. rev. cancer. 5:886–897.
kuma, a., m. hatano, m. matsui, a. yamamoto, h. nakaya, t. yoshimori, y. 
ohsumi, t. tokuhisa, and n. mizushima. 2004. the role of autophagy 
during the early neonatal starvation period. nature. 432:1032–1036.
lee, c.y., c.r. simon, c.t. woodard, and e.h. baehrecke. 2002. genetic mech-
anism  for  the  stage-  and  tissue-specifi c  regulation  of  steroid  triggered 
programmed cell death in drosophila. dev. biol. 252:138–148.
liang, x.h., s. jackson, m. seaman, k. brown, b. kempkes, h. hibshoosh, and 
b. levine. 1999. induction of autophagy and inhibition of tumorigenesis 
by beclin 1. nature. 402:672–676.
lum,  j.j.,  d.e.  bauer,  m.  kong,  m.h.  harris,  c.  li,  t.  lindsten,  and  c.b. 
thompson. 2005. growth factor regulation of autophagy and cell survival 
in the absence of apoptosis. cell. 120:237–248.
martin,  d.n.,  and  e.h.  baehrecke.  2004.  caspases  function  in  autophagic 
 programmed cell death in drosophila. development. 131:275–284.
mizushima, n., a. yamamoto, m. hatano, y. kobayashi, y. kabeya, k. suzuki, 
t. tokuhisa, y. ohsumi, and t. yoshimori. 2001. dissection of autopha-
gosome  formation  using apg5-defi cient  mouse  embryonic  stem  cells. 
j. cell biol. 152:657–668.
mizushima, n., a. yamamoto, m. matsui, t. yoshimori, and y. ohsumi. 2004. 
in  vivo  analysis  of  autophagy  in  response  to  nutrient  starvation  using 
transgenic  mice  expressing  a  fl uorescent  autophagosome  marker. 
mol. biol. cell. 15:1101–1111.
neely, a.n., j.r. cox, j.a. fortney, c.m. schworer, and g.e. mortimore. 1977. 
alterations  of  lysosomal  size  and  density  during  rat  liver  perfusion. 
suppression by insulin and amino acids. j. biol. chem. 252:6948–6954.
noda, t., and y. ohsumi. 1998. tor, a phosphatidylinositol kinase homologue, 
controls autophagy in yeast. j. biol. chem. 273:3963–3966.
paglin, s., t. hollister, t. delohery, n. hackett, m. mcmahill, e. sphicas, d. 
domingo, and j. yahalom. 2001. a novel response of cancer cells to ra-
diation involves autophagy and formation of acidic vesicles. cancer res. 
61:439–444.
park, s.y., and a. ferreira. 2005. the generation of a 17 kda neurotoxic frag-
ment:  an  alternative  mechanism  by  which  tau  mediates  beta-amyloid-
 induced neurodegeneration. j. neurosci. 25:5365–5375.
pattingre,  s.,  c.  bauvy,  and  p.  codogno.  2003.  amino  acids  interfere  with 
the  erk1/2-dependent  control  of  macroautophagy  by  controlling  the 
activation of raf-1 in human colon cancer ht-29 cells.  j. biol. chem. 
278:16667–16674.
pattingre, s., a. tassa, x. qu, r. garuti, x.h. liang, n. mizushima, m. packer, 
m.d. schneider, and b. levine. 2005. bcl-2 antiapoptotic proteins inhibit 
beclin 1-dependent autophagy. cell. 122:927–939.
pfeifer, u. 1973. cellular autophagy and cell atrophy in the rat liver during long-
term starvation. a quantitative morphological study with regard to diurnal 
variations. virchows arch. b cell pathol. 12:195–211.
punnonen,  e.l.,  and  h.  reunanen.  1990.  effects  of  vinblastine,  leucine,  and 
histidine,  and  3-methyladenine  on  autophagy  in  ehrlich  ascites  cells. 
exp. mol. pathol. 52:87–97.
ravikumar, b., c. vacher, z. berger, j.e. davies, s. luo, l.g. oroz, f. scaravilli, 
d.f.  easton,  r.  duden,  c.j.  o’kane,  and  d.c.  rubinsztein.  2004. 
inhibition  of  mtor  induces  autophagy  and  reduces  toxicity  of  poly-
glutamine  expansions  in  fl y  and  mouse  models  of  huntington  disease. 
nat. genet. 36:585–595.
604
jcb • volume 175 • number 4 • 2006
published november 13, 2006
rusten,  t.e.,  k.  lindmo,  g.  juhasz,  m.  sass,  p.o.  seglen, a.  brech,  and  h. 
stenmark. 2004. programmed autophagy in the drosophila fat body is 
induced by ecdysone through regulation of the pi3k pathway. dev. cell. 
7:179–192.
scarlatti,  f.,  c.  bauvy,  a.  ventruti,  g.  sala,  f.  cluzeaud,  a.  vandewalle,  r. 
ghidoni,  and  p.  codogno.  2004.  ceramide-mediated  macroautophagy 
involves  inhibition  of  protein  kinase  b  and  up-regulation  of  beclin  1. 
j. biol. chem. 279:18384–18391.
schad, e., a. farkas, g. jekely, p. tompa, and p. friedrich. 2002. a novel human 
small subunit of calpains. biochem. j. 362:383–388.
shimizu, s., t. kanaseki, n. mizushima, t. mizuta, s. arakawa-kobayashi, c.b. 
thompson, and y. tsujimoto. 2004. role of bcl-2 family proteins in a 
non-apoptotic  programmed  cell  death  dependent  on  autophagy  genes. 
nat. cell biol. 6:1221–1228.
sutherland,  r.,  d.  delia,  c.  schneider,  r.  newman,  j.  kemshead,  and  m. 
greaves.  1981.  ubiquitous  cell-surface  glycoprotein  on  tumor  cells  is 
proliferation-associated receptor for transferring. proc. natl. acad. sci. 
usa. 78:4515–4519.
takacs-vellai, k., t. vellai, a. puoti, m. passannante, c. wicky, a. streit, a.l. 
kovacs, and f. muller. 2005. inactivation of the autophagy gene bec-1 
triggers apoptotic cell death in c. elegans. curr. biol. 15:1513–1517.
tanabe,  f.,  s.h.  cui,  and  m.  ito.  1998.  ceramide  promotes  calpain- mediated 
proteolysis  of  protein  kinase  c  beta  in  murine  polymorphonuclear 
 leukocytes. biochem. biophys. res. commun. 242:129–133.
varghese,  j.,  g.  radhika,  and a.  sarin.  2001.  the  role  of  calpain  in  caspase 
activation during etoposide induced apoptosis in t cells. eur. j. immunol. 
31:2035–2041.
webb, j.l., b. ravikumar, j. atkins, j.n. skepper, and d.c. rubinsztein. 2003. 
alpha-synuclein  is  degraded  by  both  autophagy  and  the  proteasome. 
j. biol. chem. 278:25009–25013.
xu, l., and x. deng. 2004. tobacco-specifi c nitrosamine 4-(methylnitrosamino)-
1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone induces phosphorylation of mu- and m-calpain 
in  association  with  increased  secretion,  cell  migration,  and  invasion. 
j. biol. chem. 279:53683–53690.
xue, l., g.c. fletcher, and a.m. tolkovsky. 1999. autophagy is activated by 
apoptotic signalling in sympathetic neurons: an alternative mechanism of 
death execution. mol. cell. neurosci. 14:180–198.
yorimitsu,  t.,  and  d.j.  klionsky.  2005. autophagy:  molecular  machinery  for 
self-eating. cell death differ. 12:1542–1552.
yu, l., a. alva, h. su, p. dutt, e. freundt, s. welsh, e.h. baehrecke, and m.j. 
lenardo. 2004. regulation of an atg7-beclin 1 program of autophagic 
cell death by caspase-8. science. 304:1500–1502.
yue,  z., a.  horton,  m.  bravin,  p.l.  dejager,  f.  selimi,  and  n.  heintz.  2002. 
a  novel  protein  complex  linking  the  delta  2  glutamate  receptor  and 
auto phagy:  implications  for  neurodegeneration  in  lurcher  mice.  neuron. 
35:921–933.
yue, z., s. jin, c. yang, a.j. levine, and n. heintz. 2003. beclin 1, an autophagy 
gene  essential  for  early  embryonic  development,  is  a  haploinsuffi cient 
tumor suppressor. proc. natl. acad. sci. usa. 100:15077–15082.
calpain is required for macroautophagy • demarchi et al.
605