human molecular genetics, 2006, vol. 15, no. 19
doi:10.1093/hmg/ddl239
advance access published on september 8, 2006
2962–2971
depletion of type ia regulatory subunit (ria) of
protein kinase a (pka) in mammalian cells and
tissues activates mtor and causes autophagic
deﬁciency
manos mavrakis1,*, jennifer lippincott-schwartz1, constantine a. stratakis2
and ioannis bossis2
1cell biology and metabolism branch, national institute of child health and human development, national
institutes of health, room 101, building 18t, 18 library drive, bethesda, md 20892, usa and 2section on
endocrinology and genetics, developmental endocrinology branch, national institute of child health and human
development, national institutes of health, building 10, crc, 10 center drive bethesda, md 20892, usa
received july 13, 2006; revised and accepted august 24, 2006
the human prkar1a gene encodes the regulatory subunit 1-alpha (ria) of the camp-dependent protein
kinase a (pka) holoenzyme. regulation of the catalytic activity of pka is the only well-studied function of
ria. inactivating prkar1a mutations cause primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease (ppnad)
or carney complex (cnc), an inherited syndrome associated with abnormal skin pigmentation and multiple
neoplasias, including ppnad. histochemistry of tissues from cnc patients is indicative of autophagic
deﬁciency and this led us to investigate the relationship between ria and mammalian autophagy. we
found that ﬂuorescently tagged ria associates with late endosomes and autophagosomes in cultured
cells. the number of autophagosomes in prkar1a2/2 mouse embryonic ﬁbroblasts (mefs) was reduced com-
pared with wild-type mefs. ria co-immunoprecipitated with mtor kinase, a major regulator of autophagy.
phosphorylated-mtor levels and mtor activity were dramatically increased in prkar1a 2/2 mouse cells,
and in hek 293 cells with ria levels reduced by sirna. finally, phosphorylated-mtor levels and mtor
activity were increased in cnc cells and in ppnad tissues. these data suggest that ria deﬁciency decreases
autophagy by the activation of mtor, providing a molecular basis to autophagic deﬁciency in ppnad.
introduction
inactivating mutations of the human prkar1a gene cause a
multiple neoplasia and lentiginosis syndrome, carney complex
(cnc) (1). the most common manifestations are multiple skin
macules, known as lentigines, and other pigmented lesions
such as blue and compound nevi and primary pigmented
nodular adrenocortical disease (ppnad) (2). heavily pigmented
macromelanosomes account for the pigmentation in lentigines
and the nevi; however, the increased pigmentation in ppnad
nodules is due to the accumulation of lipofuscin-like material
(3,4). macromelanosomes are thought to originate from defec-
tive melanosome autophagocytosis (5,6), whereas accumulation
of lipofuscin is a hallmark of autophagic deﬁciency (7,8).
autophagy is an evolutionarily conserved mechanism in all
eukaryotes; its basic role is the bulk turnover of long-lived
proteins and cytoplasmic organelles. during the process of
autophagy, portions of the cytosol, organelles or targeted
cargo are sequestered in double membrane-bound vesicles
(autophagosomes), which then fuse with lysosomes (or vacu-
oles in yeast) releasing the sequestered contents into the
lumen for degradation by resident hydrolases (9,10). inhibition
of the target of rapamycin (tor) kinase is a major prere-
quisite for starvation-induced autophagy in saccharomyces
cerevisiae (11), and it is required to control atg1-dependent
organization of protein complexes on the pre-autophagosomal
membrane (12,13). reduced tor activity is also required for
the maturation of
into
the pre-autophagosomal vesicles
*to whom correspondence should be addressed. tel: +1 3014021010; fax: +1 3014020078; email: mavrakim@mail.nih.gov
published by oxford university press.
autophagic vacuoles by increasing the expression of autopha-
gic speciﬁc genes such as atg8 (14).
biogenesis,
actin
several nutrient-
both in yeast and higher eukaryotes, mtor signaling plays
a key role in various processes including protein translation,
ribosome
organization, mitochondrial
oxygen consumption and oxidative capacity, metabolism,
transcription of
and stress-responsive
factors and autophagy (15). the best studied targets of
mtor in mammalian cells are the translation regulators
s6k1 and 4e-bp1. phosphorylation of
these targets by
mtor has provided a possible mechanism by which nutrient
deprivation affects protein translation. however, no evidence
indicates that mtor affects autophagosome biogenesis and/
or autophagic activity through phosphorylation of s6k1 or
4ebp1. in yeast, tor negatively controls autophagy via
inhibition of the protein kinase atg1; however, the mammalian
homolog of atg1 has not yet been identiﬁed.
the human prkar1a gene encodes the regulatory subunit
1-alpha (ria) of the camp-dependent protein kinase a
(pka) holoenzyme. phosphorylation mediated by the
camp/pka signaling pathway can be elicited by various
physiological ligands in cells and is critically involved in
the regulation of metabolism, cell proliferation, differen-
tiation and apoptosis (16). pka exists as a tetrameric holo-
enzyme consisting essentially of two dimers: one composed
of regulatory subunits, and the other of two inactive catalytic
subunits (17). cooperative binding of two camp molecules
to each regulatory subunit results in dissociation and the con-
sequent release (activation) of the two catalytic subunits.
there are four genes encoding the different regulatory sub-
units (ria, rib, riia, riib) and three genes encoding the
catalytic subunits ca, cb and cg (18). ria, riia and ca
are ubiquitously expressed, whereas the rest of these genes
have tissue-speciﬁc expression (19). the best known function
of the r subunits in vitro is inhibition of the c subunit kinase
activity.
the pathological characteristics of cnc indicative of an
autophagy deﬁciency, together with the role of the prkar1a-
homolog bcy1 in yeast autophagy, led us to investigate mtor
in human ppnad tissues bearing inactivating prkar1a
mutations. complete prkar1a loss, as indicated by the loss
of heterozygosity (loh) and the corresponding normal
allele in these tissues, was associated with the accumulation
of autophagic substrates in the adenomatous nodules com-
pared with the surrounding (hemizygous for prkar1a)
normal adrenocortical cells. we then investigated the intra-
cellular distribution of ria and its association with mtor
kinase: ﬂuorescently tagged ria was found to associate with
lc3-labeled autophagosomes. accordingly,
the number of
lc3-labeled autophagosomes was signiﬁcantly reduced in
prkar1a2/2 mouse embryonic ﬁbroblasts (mefs), which
were devoid of any ria protein. in biochemical assays, ria
was found to interact with mtor and affect signiﬁcantly its
kinase activity. downregulation of ria in hek293 cells
increased phosphorylation of mtor and mtor kinase
activity. finally, ppnad tissues with prkar1a mutations
showed increased mtor phosphorylation and mtor activity.
indeed ria and mtor
altogether, our data suggest
are involved in a common pathway regulating mammalian
autophagy.
that
human molecular genetics, 2006, vol. 15, no. 19
2963
results and discussion
prkar1a-null ppnad tissues showed lipofuscin
accumulation
(1)
transverse sections of ppnad tissues from patients with the
478deltg prkar1a-inactivating mutation
showed
increased lipofuscin in the pigmented nodules when stained
with ziehl – neelsen stain, which is speciﬁc for lipofuscin
(3,4) (fig. 1a). the pigmented nodules in these experiments
were dissected using laser-capture microdissection (lcm)
(fig. 1b, upper panel), and dna was isolated from these
nodules, as well as from blood and total adrenoglandular
tissue homogenates. loh and, speciﬁcally, loss of the wild-
type prkar1a allele were evident only in the adenoma
cells
(fig. 1b,
bottom panel). lipofuscin accumulation is a hallmark of
autophagic deﬁciency (7,8). thus, our observation that lipo-
fuscin accumulated only in the cells lacking both prkar1a
alleles (making them devoid of any ria protein) suggested a
potential role of ria in the regulation of autophagy.
that constituted the pigmented nodules
egfp-ria localized on late endosomes
and autophagosomes
to determine the subcellular localization of ria, we expressed
prkar1a (ria) tagged with green ﬂuorescent protein (egfp,
see materials and methods) in a variety of cell types (hela,
mnt-1, nrk, cos-7, mef) and observed its distribution in
living and ﬁxed cells. the tagged protein showed a diffuse cyto-
solic pool but was also found on spot-like structures scattered
throughout the cell, with a pronounced perinuclear accumu-
lation in most cells (fig. 1c, egfp-ria). to ensure that the
observed spot-like structures were not non-speciﬁc aggregates
formed by the presence of egfp, we also transfected cells
with ria tagged with ha and immunostained using anti-ha
antibodies. ha-ria displayed a pattern identical to the one
observed in egfp-ria-transfected cells (fig. 1c, ha-ria).
to further explore the nature of the spot-like structures and to
determine if ria molecules are immobilized on these struc-
tures, we performed ﬂuorescence recovery after photobleaching
(frap) experiments in cells expressing egfp-ria (20). a
single spot-like structure was photobleached using a high-
intensity laser beam, abolishing egfp ﬂuorescence. low-
power imaging was then used to assess ﬂuorescence recovery
into the photobleached region. a rapid and complete recovery
of egfp-ria ﬂuorescence was observed (fig. 1d), indicating
that egfp-ria molecules readily move on and off the struc-
tures, exchanging with a cytosolic pool of the protein.
to further
investigate the subcellular
localization of
egfp-ria, we imaged egfp-ria in the presence of various
organelle markers, either by immunostaining or in living
cells co-transfected with different organelle markers. pka
regulatory subunit riib has been shown to target pka to
the golgi complex (21), so we began by looking at the poten-
tial association of egfp-ria with the golgi complex. toward
this end, we visualized the golgi stack using galt-cfp, the
trans-golgi network using anti-tgn46 antibodies, the golgi
matrix using anti-gm130 antibodies and the er-to-golgi
intermediate compartment using p58-cfp (see materials and
methods). no colocalization of egfp-ria with any of these
2964
human molecular genetics, 2006, vol. 15, no. 19
figure 1. ppnad caused by prkar1a-inactivating mutations is associated with lipofuscin accumulation in the nodular regions of the tissue. egfp-ria loca-
lized in the cytosol and on spot-like structures. spot-like egfp-ria readily exchanged with the cytosolic pool of the protein and was not associated with golgi,
mitochondria or peroxisomes. (a) a ppnad adrenal gland was stained with ziehl– neelsen-speciﬁc stain for lipofuscin (see materials and methods). a trans-
verse section of the gland is shown to indicate lipofuscin accumulation in the pigmented nodules (left panel). the image on the right is a magniﬁcation of the
black outlined rectangle in the image on the left. (b) pigmented nodules in a ppnad tissue were dissected using lcm (black dashed outlines, upper panel).
nodular dna was prepared as described in materials and methods and used for pcr using the polymorphic marker gata1e12, which cosegregated with the
disease (1) in the family of the patient (bottom panel, nodules). pcr was also performed on lymphocyte dna from the unaffected father (wt), lymphocyte dna
from the affected daughter (blood) and total tumor dna (gland). the absence of the band segregating with the wild-type prkar1a allele indicated loh only in
the nodular cells. (c) egfp-ria exhibited a cytosolic and spot-like distribution in transiently transfected hela cells (left panel). the same distribution was
observed in hela cells transiently transfected with ha-ria (right panel), indicating that the spot-like distribution was not due to non-speciﬁc aggregation
of egfp. (d) egfp-ria on spot-like structures readily exchanged with the cytosolic pool of the protein as determined by frap. a small roi (white outlined
rectangle) encompassing an egfp-ria spot was photobleached and ﬂuorescence recovery was monitored; egfp-ria ﬂuorescence signiﬁcantly recovered within
seconds of photobleaching. (e) hela cells were transiently transfected with egfp-ria and then processed for immunostaining for peroxisomes (a-catalase), the
golgi matrix (a-gm130) and the trans-golgi network (a-tgn46). cells were co-transfected with p58-cfp to visualize the er-to-golgi intermediate compart-
ment and with galt-cfp to visualize the golgi stack. for mitochondria staining, cells were incubated with mitotracker before ﬁxation (see materials and
methods). egfp-ria spots did not associate with any of these compartments.
compartments was observed (fig. 1e). we also imaged
egfp-ria in the presence of a peroxisomal marker
(anti-catalase) and a mitochondrial marker (mitotracker), but
no colocalization was observed (fig. 1e).
we next investigated the potential association of ria with endo-
somal compartments of the cell. for this, we imaged venus-ria
coexpressed with cerulean-tagged rab5 (marking early endo-
somes) (22), rab7 (marking lysosomes) or rab9 (marking late
endosomes) (23). although no association of ria with rab5-
positive endosomes was observed (data not shown), venus-ria
was associated with a subset of rab7- and rab9-positive
endosomes (fig. 2a). in time-lapse sequences in living cells
with
and
venus-ria
co-transfected
cerulean-rab9,
venus-ria-positive spots were often seen to associate and move
together with cerulean-rab9-positive endosomes (fig. 2b).
venus-ria was also associated with cerulean-rab7-positive
endosomes, and when we selectively photobleached the venus-
ria pool on these endosomes,
it rapidly recovered, again
indicating a dynamic exchange of venus-ria molecules on the
endosomes with the cytosolic pool of ria (fig. 2c).
rab7 is a small gtpase involved in lysosome biogenesis
(24) and maturation of late autophagic compartments (25–27).
hence, our observation that ria-containing structures were
positive for rab7 raised the question of whether
these
human molecular genetics, 2006, vol. 15, no. 19
2965
figure 2. egfp-ria spots associated with late endosomes and autophagosomes. (a – c) hela cells were co-transfected with venus-ria and cerulean-rab7 or
cerulean-rab9 to visualize late endosomes. venus-ria spots were often seen to associate and move with rab7-positive endosomes (a, empty arrowheads) or
rab9-positive endosomes (a, white arrowheads). a time-lapse sequence is shown in (b), where venus-ria spots associated with rab9-positive endosomes
moved with the latter over time (white arrowheads). in a frap experiment (c), venus-ria, which was associated with rab7-positive endosomes (white outlined
rectangle) was selectively photobleached to show fast recovery of the ria pool on the rab7-positive endosome. (d) nrk or mef cells were co-transfected with
egfp-ria and cfp-lc3 to visualize autophagosomes. representative confocal images are shown to demonstrate that the majority of egfp-ria spots associ-
ated with lc3-positive autophagosomes.
structures represented autophagosomes. to investigate this
further, we co-transfected egfp-ria-expressing cells with
cfp-lc3, a protein that has been shown to speciﬁcally associ-
ate with membranes of maturating autophagosomes (27 – 29).
representative confocal
images are shown in figure 2d.
virtually all the ria-expressing structures were labeled with
cfp-lc3. this suggested that ria resides on autophago-
somes, where it potentially functions.
in prkar1a2/2 mefs,
there
lc3-labeled autophagosomes,
were a remarkably decreased number of lc3-labeled autopha-
gosomes; in addition, there was an increased cytosolic and
nuclear pool of lc3 (fig. 3a). to quantify the observed
differences, autophagosomes were counted in each cell line
(fig. 3b). a statistically signiﬁcant difference in the number
cells
of autophagosomes was observed, with prkar1a
having on average 18 autophagosomes per cell compared
with 3 in prkar1a2/2 cells that lack ria.
þ/þ
the number of autophagosomes is reduced
in prkar1a2/2 mefs
to investigate a possible role of ria on autophagosomes, we
examined the cfp-lc3 distribution in prkar1a
and
prkar1a2/2 mef cell
lines (see materials and methods),
þ/þ
which express or do not express ria. although prkar1a
mefs showed a pronounced perinuclear accumulation of
þ/þ
ria and mtor co-immunoprecipitated and
phosphorylated-mtor levels and mtor activities
were increased in cells with low ria levels
given that ria associates with autophagosomes and that there
is a reduced number of autophagosomes in prkar1a2/2 cells,
which lack ria (figs 2d and 3), we next investigated whether
2966
human molecular genetics, 2006, vol. 15, no. 19
mefs and prkar1a2/2 mefs, tran-
figure 3. the number of autophagosomes is reduced in prkar1a2/2 mefs. representative confocal images of prkar1a
þ/þ
mefs (a, left panel), whereas it
siently transfected with cfp-lc3 to visualize autophagosomes (a). cfp-lc3 accumulated on autophagosomes in prkar1a
did so to a much lesser extent in prkar1a2/2 mefs, exhibiting a higher cytosolic and nuclear pool in the latter (a, right panel). for quantitation, both cell lines
were optically sliced on a confocal microscope (see materials and methods) and then maximum intensity z-projections were generated for each cell to visualize
all autophagosomes, which were then counted. the average number of autophagosomes in each cell line was plotted (b, shown as mean + sd). immunoblots
showing ria levels in each cell line are shown in (c), along with b-actin immunostaining as a protein-loading control.
þ/þ
ria interacts with mtor kinase in immunoprecipitation
experiments. ria was immunoprecipitated from hek 293
cells transfected with ha-ria, and the pellet was then
immunoblotted for mtor. notably, mtor was
seen
co-precipitating with ria (fig. 4a,
left panel). inversely,
when endogenous mtor was immunoprecipitated and the
pellet immunoblotted for ria, ria was found to co-precipitate
with mtor (fig. 4a, right panel). the data thus suggested
that a pool of ria and a pool of mtor molecules form a
complex within the cell.
altered
using
þ/þ
amounts
that were
ria
of
assessed
to further investigate the connection between mtor and
ria, we measured total protein levels of mtor, levels of
phosphorylated mtor (‘phospho-mtor’) and levels of
mtor activity (see materials and methods) in cells with
protein.
experimentally
phosphorylated-mtor levels were
phospho-mtor antibody speciﬁc for ser2448. we utilized
cells
transfected with pcdna3.1 (‘mock’),
pcdna3.1-ria (to overexpress ria) or ria sirna (to
and prkar1a2/2
silence ria). additionally, prkar1a
mefs were used. in each cell condition, ria, mtor and
phosphorylated-mtor levels were assayed by immunoblot-
ting (fig. 4b and c). in prkar1a2/2 mefs and in cells trans-
fected with ria sirna,
in
phosphorylated-mtor levels in cells with low ria levels
was observed (fig. 4d). total mtor levels were not different
in these experimental groups (fig. 4c). this observation
suggested that ria is involved in the mechanism of mtor
then measured mtor activity
phosphorylation. we
under the earlier-mentioned conditions and found that,
in
dramatic
increase
prkar1a2/2 mefs and in cells transfected with ria sirna,
mtor activity was also dramatically increased in cells with
low ria levels (fig. 4e). we also treated cells with rapamy-
cin, one of the drugs commonly used to inhibit the mtor
kinase, and looked at
the number of autophagosomes,
mtor phosphorylation and activity, but both hek 293 and
wild-type mef cells were not responsive to rapamycin (data
not shown). in cultured cells, therefore, reduced ria level
(by sirna or in prkar1a2/2 cells) is correlated with (1)
increased phosphorylation of mtor (2) increased mtor
activity and (3) reduced autophagic vacuole formation.
ppnad tissues with prkar1a mutations show increased
phosphorylated-mtor staining and mtor activity
to determine whether a similar relationship among ria levels,
mtor activity and autophagic vacuole formation occurs
in pigmented nodules of ppnad patients, we performed
immunohistochemistry (ihc) on these structures using
anti-phosphorylated-mtor antibodies
(see materials and
methods). in normal tissues, as well in tissues from other adre-
nocortical tumors, in which both wild-type prkar1a alleles
are present, phospho-mtor staining was not prominent
(fig. 5a). however, in tissues from four ppnad patients
(each caused by a different prkar1a-inactivating mutation),
phospho-mtor staining in the nodules was dramatically
increased (fig. 5a, car002.02, car025.01, car047.01,
car555.03). mtor activity was also assayed in micro-
scopically dissected nodular tissue from the same patients
and signiﬁcantly increased mtor activity was
found
human molecular genetics, 2006, vol. 15, no. 19
2967
figure 4. ria and mtor co-immunoprecipitated; phosphorylated-mtor levels and mtor activity were found increased in cells with low ria levels. (a) hek
293 cells were transfected with ha-ria, and ria was immunoprecipitated with a-ha antibodies. the pellet was then immunoblotted against mtor and ria,
and mtor was found to co-immunoprecipitate with ria (left panel). inversely, when endogenous mtor was immunoprecipitated in hek 293 cells and the
pellet immunoblotted against mtor and ria, ria was found to co-immunoprecipitate with mtor (right panel). (b) cells were transfected with pcdna3.1
(mock), pcdna3.1-ria to overexpress ria or ria sirna to silence ria, and ria levels under all conditions were assayed by immunoblotting. ria levels
) and prkar1a2/2 mefs. b-actin was used as a protein-loading control. (c) mtor and phosphorylated-mtor
were also assayed in wild-type ( prkar1a
levels were measured by immunoblotting in cells with experimentally altered ria levels (b). phosphorylated-mtor levels were assessed using a
phospho-mtor antibody speciﬁc for ser2448. b-actin was used as a protein-loading control. (d) mtor and phosphorylated-mtor immunoblots shown in
(c) were quantiﬁed by densitometry and the phospho-mtor/mtor ratio plotted for each condition. there was no signiﬁcant difference in total mtor
levels but the phospho-mtor/mtor ratio was highest in prkar1a2/2 cells and cells where ria was silenced by rnai, indicating that ria is involved in
mtor phosphorylation. (e) mtor activity was measured in the absence of any lysate (negative), cells transfected with pcdna3.1 (mock), pcdna3.1-ria
and ria sirna and wild-type and prkar1a2/2 mefs. mtor activity was highest in prkar1a2/2 mefs and cells where ria was silenced by rnai, as was
the phospho-mtor/mtor ratio under these conditions, indicating that mtor activity is highly correlated with phosphorylation of mtor at ser2448.
þ/þ
compared with the perinodular tissue (fig. 5b). since the
pigmented nodules in the ppnad patients have reduced
autophagic activity (assessed by lipofuscin accumulation),
the data support a role for ria in regulating mammalian
autophagy through the mtor kinase.
these ﬁndings provide a basis for explaining the cellular
phenotype of a primary adrenocortical hyperplasia (ppnad).
the hallmark of this disorder, lipofuscin accumulation, would
appear to result from autophagy deﬁciency caused by increased
mtor phosphorylation and activity in response to ria
depletion. because dysregulation of mtor activity has been
implicated in the pathogenesis of several hamartoma syn-
dromes (30), including those caused by the tuberous sclerosis
complex, the peutz – jeghers, leopard and the pten-related
syndromes (cowden disease, proteus syndrome, lhermitte –
duclos disease), it is possible that ria is involved in alterations
in mtor signaling in each of these hamartoma syndromes, as
our study demonstrates for cnc.
previously,
the pka signaling system was not directly
linked to the regulation of mtor or autophagy in mammalian
cells, although an interaction was speculated on the basis of
studies on s. cerevisiae showing a regulatory role of pka
2968
human molecular genetics, 2006, vol. 15, no. 19
figure 5. ppnad tissues with mutations in prkar1a show increased phosphorylated-mtor staining and increased mtor activity. (a) phosphorylated-mtor
ihc (see materials and methods) was performed on adrenal glands from healthy individuals (‘normal’), ppnad patients (car002.02, car025.01, car047.01,
car555.03) or patients with other adrenocortical tumors (a cortisol-producing adenoma in this case). phosphorylated-mtor staining was dramatically
increased in ppnad nodules compared with normal tissue or nodules from cortisol-producing adenoma tissue. (b) mtor activity was measured in microscopi-
cally dissected ppnad nodules (see materials and methods). mtor activity was found to be dramatically increased compared with the perinodular tissue.
increased mtor activity and increased phosphorylated-mtor levels, together with lipofuscin accumulation and loss-of-heterozygosity at the prkar1a
locus only in the pigmented nodules, strongly suggested that mtor and ria are indeed involved in a common pathway regulating autophagy.
signaling in autophagy (30,31). indeed, in a recent proteomics
study, atg1, atg13 and atg18 (components of the yeast
autophagic machinery) were identiﬁed as potential pka phos-
phorylation substrates (32). in a different study, bcy1 (yeast
homolog of ria)-mutant yeast strains displayed constitutively
high pka activity and did not tolerate nutrient deprivation due
to defective autophagy (33). these effects were not mediated
by increased pka catalytic activity since in bcy1-null cells
containing a mutated tpk1 gene and deleted of tpk2 and
tpk3 (tpk1, tpk2 and tpk3 are the catalytic subunits of
yeast pka), pka activity was not excessively elevated (34).
however,
responsive to starvation-
induced autophagy, indicating bcy1 is important for normal
autophagy regardless of camp-dependent kinase activity.
these cells were not
our study suggests that ria and the mtor kinase are
mechanistically linked in regulating autophagy, with ria
deﬁciency decreasing autophagy by the activation of mtor.
further work is needed to understand how this occurs. one
possibility relates to the fact that ria has a kinase interaction
domain that binds to the catalytic subunit of pka. because
mtor is a serine/threonine kinase (like pka), the interaction
of ria with mtor may block mtor phosphorylation. in this
model, ria would be required to maintain phosphorylated
levels of mtor at low levels, as increased phosphorylation
of mtor blocks autophagy. another possible model is that
ria forms a complex with a phosphatase and an mtor.
this is consistent with current literature supporting a role
for phosphatases in controlling the phosphorylation status of
mtor (30). in this scenario, ria would sequester a phospha-
tase in an ria – mtor – phosphatase complex and thereby
control mtor phosphorylation.
materials and methods
analysis of allelic losses in microdissected
ppnad tissues
loh analysis was performed as has been previously described
(1), using the polymorphic marker gata1e12. the pcr reac-
tions were performed on lymphocyte dna from the unaf-
fected father, lymphocyte dna from the affected daughter,
total
tumor dna and dna from lcm-obtained ppnad
nodular tissue. for lcm, histological sections were prepared
from formalin-ﬁxed parafﬁn-embedded tissue and were
stained with hematoxylin and eosin for microscopic evalu-
ation. from these slides, the nodular areas were identiﬁed.
laser-assisted microdissection of the nodular epithelium was
performed on the unstained sections using a pixcell ii laser
capture microdissection system (arcturus engineering, moun-
tain view, ca, usa), as previously described (35). approxi-
mately 2000 cells were microdissected from the 5 mm
histological sections. after microdissection, the cells were
inserted into an eppendorf tube dewaxed, rehydrated and
ﬁnally incubated with digestion buffer (50 ml buffer contain-
ing 0.04% proteinase k, 10 mm tris – hcl ph 8.0, 1 mm
edta and 1% tween-20) at 378c overnight. the reactions
were terminated by heating to 958c for 10 min to inactivate
the proteinase k and used directly for pcr.
identiﬁcation of lipofuscin in ppnad
ziehl–neelsen stain for lipofuscin was performed on formalin-
ﬁxed parafﬁn-embedded ppnad adrenal tumors, as has been
previously described (3). five micrometer parafﬁn sections
from ppnad tumors were mounted on adhesive-coated slides.
after dewaxing with xylenes and rehydration in a graded
series of ethanol, warm carbol-fuchsin solution was applied to
the section slides for 5 min at 458c. destaining was done with
1% concentrated hydrochloric acid in 70% ethanol (vol/vol)
for 5 min at room temperature. no counterstain was used. the
glycerol-mounted sections were observed with a nikon opti-
photo microscope with
interference-contrast
(nomarski) optics before and after acid-fast staining.
differential
cell cultures
hela cells were cultured in dulbecco’s modiﬁed eagle’s
medium supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal
human molecular genetics, 2006, vol. 15, no. 19
2969
þ/þ
bovine serum, penicillin and streptomycin under 5% co2.
) primary mefs were isolated from
wild-type ( prkar1a
six day-10 mouse embryos of c57bl6xsjl mixed back-
ground. prkar1a2/2 mef cells were kindly given to us by
dr l. kirschner (ohio state university, columbus, oh) and
they have been described elsewhere (36); these cells have
also been created from mice of the same mixed genetic back-
ground. hek293 cells were used for immunoblotting and
immunoprecipitation experiments.
antibodies and expression constructs
anti-rabbit
(1:1000)
immunoblotting,
(cat. no. 610610),
from molecular probes
the following antibodies were used for immunoﬂuorescence:
rabbit anti-catalase (1:500)
from calbiochem (cat. no.
219010), mouse anti-gm130 (1:50) from transduction lab-
oratories (cat. no. g65120), sheep anti-tgn46 (1:1000)
from serotec (cat. no. ahp500), af546-conjugated goat anti-
mouse (1:1000) from molecular probes, af546-conjugated
goat
and
cy3-conjugated donkey anti-sheep (1:1000) from jackson
immunoresearch laboratories. for
an
anti-ria monoclonal antibody (1:500) was obtained from
bd transduction laboratories
an
anti-mtor polyclonal antibody (1:2000) from abcam (cat.
no. ab2833-50) and rabbit polyclonal anti-phospho-mtor
(ser2448) (1:1000) from cell signaling technologies (cat.
no 2971). the following conjugated antibodies were used
for immunoprecipitations: agarose-immobilized anti-ha high-
afﬁnity rat monoclonal antibody (clone 3f10) from roche
(cat. no. 11815016001) at 50ml/100 mg of protein and
agarose immobilized rabbit polyclonal anti-mtor (4 mg/
200 mg of total protein) from abcam (cat. no. ab19207-100).
for
ihc, a rabbit mab anti-phospho-mtor (ser2448)
(49f9) was obtained from cell signaling technologies (cat.
no. 2976) and used at 1:50 dilution. galt-cfp, p58-cfp
and cfp-lc3 constructs have been described previously
(37,38). ecfp-rab7 and egfp-rab9 constructs were a gift
from s. pfeffer (stanford university school of medicine,
ca). ecfp and egfp were then replaced by cerulean from
the pcerulean-c1 plasmid using agei and bsrgi restriction
sites to generate cerulean-rab7 and cerulean-rab9.
cloning of ria constructs
pcdna3.1-ha-ria was prepared by subcloning a hindiii/
xhoi fragment of the ha-tagged human prkaria cdna
from prep4-ha-ria (39), which was kindly given to us
from dr j. bertherat (hospital cochin, paris, france). for
generation of pcdna3.1-ria,
the prkar1a orf was
pcr-ampliﬁed from prep4-ha-ria using primers ﬂanked
by bamhi and sali sites (aaggatccaccatggagtct
ggcagtaccg and acagtcgactcagacagacagt
gacacaaaac). after digestion with bamhi and sali, the
fragment was ligated in bamhi/xhoi-digested pcdna3.1(2).
for generation of pegfp-ria and venus-ria, the prkar1
a orf was pcr-ampliﬁed with primers ﬂanked by xhoi/
bamhi
(tatctcgagagtctggcagtaccgcca
gtggatcctcagacagacagtgacacaaaac).
and
after digestion with xhoi and bamhi,
the fragment was
sites
2970
human molecular genetics, 2006, vol. 15, no. 19
ligated in frame with xhoi/bamhi-digested pegfp-c1 and
venus-c1.
mtor and ria immunoprecipitation
and immunoblotting
for ha-ria and endogenous mtor co-immunoprecipitations,
6  106 hek293t cells growing in 175 cm2 ﬂasks were trans-
fected with 40 mg of pcdna3.1-ha-ria using lipofectamine
2000 (invitrogen). forty-eight hours post-transfection,
the
cells were collected with cold pbs/edta and lysed with
2 ml of lysis buffer (25 mm hepes ph 7.5, 150 mm nacl,
2 mm edta, 0.4% chaps, 10 mm glycerolphosphate,
25 mm naf, 1 mm sodium orthovanadate and a complete
protease inhibitor cocktail (roche). after a brief sonication,
the lysates were clariﬁed by centrifugation at 16 000g for
20 min. one microgram of total protein was incubated over-
night with either 100 ml of anti-ha or anti-mtor agarose
beads. captured immunoprecipitates were washed three
times with lysis buffer and subjected to western blot analysis
for ria and mtor.
for immunoblotting, equivalent amounts of protein were
separated using sds – page and then transferred to a nitrocel-
lulose membrane. membranes were blocked with blocking
buffer (tbst-5% milk) for 1 h, probed with primary anti-
bodies for 2 h and then incubated with the hrp-conjugated
secondary antibody for 1 h. antibody binding was detected
by enhanced chemiluminescence (amersham). density for
each band was analyzed using a densitometer. equal protein
loading was conﬁrmed by probing b-actin. values obtained
for phosphorylated mtor were normalized to total mtor
density. for immunoprecipitation, 300 mg of lysate proteins
were immunoprecipitated overnight with the primary antibody
of interest along with protein a agarose beads in lysis buffer
and then used for kinase activity assays.
mtor activity measurement
kit
(calbiochem,
available elisa
mtor activity in tissues and cells were measured using a
commercially
cat#
cba055) according to instructions by the manufacturer.
this elisa-based activity assay utilizes a p70s6k-gst
fusion protein as a speciﬁc mtor substrate. the mtor sub-
strate is ﬁrst bound to a solid support, and mtor-containing
sample is incubated with atp in the wells of a glutathione-
coated 96-well plate where active mtor phosphorylates
p70s6k at thr389. the phosphorylated substrate is detected
with anti-p70s6k-t389 antibody,
followed by detection
with hrp-antibody conjugate and tmb substrate. transfected
cells or micro-dissected ppnad tumors were lysed by soni-
cation in lysis buffer (50 mm tris – hcl ph 7.4, 100 mm
nacl,
1%
tween-20, 1 mm edta, 20 nm microcystin-lr, 25 mm naf
and a cocktail of protease inhibitors). the lysates were clari-
ﬁed by centrifugation (16 000g for 20 min) and total protein
concentration was adjusted to 3 mg/ml with lysis buffer;
0.5 ml of the lysates were incubated for 2 h at 48c with
25 ml of anti-mtor agarose beads. the immunoprecipitates
were washed twice with lysis buffer and twice with kinase
buffer before incubation with the mtor substrate.
50 mm b-glycerophosphate,
10% glycerol,
ihc and immunoﬂuorescence
ihc for phospho-mtor on parafﬁn-embedded ppnad
tumors, normal adrenal and cortisol-producing adenomas
was performed as previously described (40) using the citrate
antigen retrieval method and tbst/bsa (50 mm tris ph
7.5, 137 mm nacl, 0.1% tween-20, 1% igg-free bsa) as
the blocking and antibody diluent buffer.
for immunoﬂuorescence, hela cells were grown on cover-
slips and ﬁxed in 4% formalin (15 min), followed by blocking
in 0.1% saponin, 1% bsa-pbs (10 min) and sequential incu-
bations with the primary and secondary antibodies. wash steps
before and after antibody incubations were performed using
0.1% saponin and 1% bsa-pbs. cells were washed in pbs
and mounted on slides with fluoromount-g (southern
biotechnology associates, birmingham, al) in preparation
for microscopy. mitochondria were visualized by staining
with mitotracker deep red 633 (molecular probes) at a
ﬁnal concentration of 300 nm.
fluorescence microscopy and photobleaching
tm
of
the
interest,
plasmids
for colocalization studies, cells were seeded overnight
in
lab-tektm chambers (nalge nunc, rochester, ny) and
cotransfected with
using
2000 (invitrogen). confocal microscope
lipofectamine
images of cells 15 – 24 h post-transfection were captured on
a zeiss 510 or zeiss confocor-2 inverted microscope using
the 413 nm line of a kr laser with a 430 – 470 emission ﬁlter
for cerulean/gfp, the 488 nm line of an ar laser with a
505 – 530 emission ﬁlter for egfp, a 543 nm hene laser
line with a 560-615 emission ﬁlter for cy3/af546 and a
633 nm hene laser line with a long-pass 650 emission ﬁlter
for mitotracker deep red 633. images were captured with
a plan-apochromatw 1.4 na 63 oil immersion objective.
cells expressing both proteins were selected for z-sectioning.
z stacks were taken using a pinhole of 1 airy unit for both
channels.
images were analyzed with imagej and zeiss
image examiner software and prepared by adobe photoshop
7.0. frap was performed by photobleaching a small region
of interest (roi) and monitoring ﬂuorescence recovery over
time, as described previously (20,41).
conﬂict of interest statement. none declared.
references
1. kirschner, l.s., carney, j.a., pack, s.d., taymans, s.e., giatzakis, c.,
cho, y.s., cho-chung, y.s. and stratakis, c.a. (2000) mutations of the
gene encoding the protein kinase a type i-alpha regulatory subunit in
patients with the carney complex. nat. genet., 26, 89 – 92.
2. stratakis, c.a. (2002) mutations of the gene encoding the protein kinase
a type i-alpha regulatory subunit (prkar1a) in patients with the
‘complex of spotty skin pigmentation, myxomas, endocrine overactivity,
and schwannomas’ (carney complex). ann. n.y. acad. sci., 968, 3 – 21.
3. shenoy, b.v., carpenter, p.c. and carney, j.a. (1984) bilateral primary
pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease. rare cause of the cushing
syndrome. am. j. surg. pathol., 8, 335 – 344.
4. carney, j.a. and ferreiro, j.a. (1996) the epithelioid blue nevus. a
multicentric familial tumor with important associations, including cardiac
myxoma and psammomatous melanotic schwannoma. am. j. surg.
pathol., 20, 259 – 272.
human molecular genetics, 2006, vol. 15, no. 19
2971
5. horikoshi, t., jimbow, k. and sugiyama, s. (1982) comparison of
macromelanosomes and autophagic giant melanosome complexes in
nevocellular nevi, lentigo simplex and malignant melanoma. j. cutan.
pathol., 9, 329 – 339.
6. jimbow, k. and horikoshi, t. (1982) the nature and signiﬁcance of
macromelanosomes in pigmented skin lesions: their morphological
characteristics, speciﬁcity for their occurrence, and possible mechanisms
for their formation. am. j. dermatopathol., 4, 413 – 420.
7. stroikin, y., dalen, h., loof, s. and terman, a. (2004) inhibition of
autophagy with 3-methyladenine results in impaired turnover of
lysosomes and accumulation of lipofuscin-like material. eur. j. cell biol.,
83, 583 – 590.
8. brunk, u.t. and terman, a. (2002) lipofuscin: mechanisms of
age-related accumulation and inﬂuence on cell function. free radic. biol.
med., 33, 611 – 619.
9. baba, m., takeshige, k., baba, n. and ohsumi, y. (1994) ultrastructural
analysis of the autophagic process in yeast: detection of autophagosomes
and their characterization. j. cell biol., 124, 903 – 913.
10. levine, b. and klionsky, d.j. (2004) development by self-digestion:
molecular mechanisms and biological functions of autophagy. dev. cell,
6, 463 – 477.
11. noda, t. and ohsumi, y. (1998) tor, a phosphatidylinositol kinase
homologue, controls autophagy in yeast. j. biol. chem., 273, 3963 – 3966.
12. kim, j., huang, w.p., stromhaug, p.e. and klionsky, d.j. (2002)
convergence of multiple autophagy and cytoplasm to vacuole targeting
components to a perivacuolar membrane compartment prior to de novo
vesicle formation. j. biol. chem., 277, 763 – 773.
13. suzuki, k., kirisako, t., kamada, y., mizushima, n., noda, t. and
ohsumi, y. (2001) the pre-autophagosomal structure organized by
concerted functions of apg genes is essential for autophagosome
formation. embo j., 20, 5971– 5981.
14. abeliovich, h., dunn, w.a., jr, kim, j. and klionsky, d.j. (2000)
dissection of autophagosome biogenesis into distinct nucleation and
expansion steps. j. cell biol., 151, 1025– 1034.
15. wullschleger, s., loewith, r. and hall, m.n. (2006) tor signaling in
growth and metabolism. cell, 124, 471 – 484.
16. cohen, p. (2002) the origins of protein phosphorylation. nat. cell biol.,
4, e127 – e130.
17. reimann, e.m., brostrom, c.o., corbin, j.d., king, c.a. and krebs, e.g.
(1971) separation of regulatory and catalytic subunits of the cyclic
3’,5’-adenosine monophosphate-dependent protein kinase(s) of rabbit
skeletal muscle. biochem. biophys. res. commun., 42, 187 – 194.
18. foss, k.b., landmark, b., skalhegg, b.s., tasken, k., jellum, e.,
hansson, v. and jahnsen, t. (1994) characterization of in vitro-translated
human regulatory and catalytic subunits of camp-dependent protein
kinases. eur. j. biochem., 220, 217 – 223.
19. bossis, i., voutetakis, a., matyakhina, l., pack, s., abu-asab, m.,
bourdeau, i., grifﬁn, k.j., courcoutsakis, n., stergiopoulos, s., batista, d.
et al. (2004) a pleiomorphic gh pituitary adenoma from a carney
complex patient displays universal allelic loss at the protein kinase a
regulatory subunit 1a (prkaria) locus. j. med. genet., 41, 596 – 600.
20. lippincott-schwartz, j. and patterson, g.h. (2003) development and use
of ﬂuorescent protein markers in living cells. science, 300, 87 – 91.
21. nigg, e.a., schafer, g., hilz, h. and eppenberger, h.m. (1985)
cyclic-amp-dependent protein kinase type ii is associated with the golgi
complex and with centrosomes. cell, 41, 1039– 1051.
22. rink, j., ghigo, e., kalaidzidis, y. and zerial, m. (2005) rab conversion
as a mechanism of progression from early to late endosomes. cell, 122,
735 – 749.
23. soldati, t., rancano, c., geissler, h. and pfeffer, s.r. (1995) rab7 and
rab9 are recruited onto late endosomes by biochemically distinguishable
processes. j. biol. chem., 270, 25541 – 25548.
24. bucci, c., thomsen, p., nicoziani, p., mccarthy, j. and van deurs, b.
(2000) rab7: a key to lysosome biogenesis. mol. biol. cell, 11, 467 – 480.
25. jager, s., bucci, c., tanida, i., ueno, t., kominami, e., saftig, p. and
eskelinen, e.l. (2004) role for rab7 in maturation of late autophagic
vacuoles. j. cell sci., 117, 4837– 4848.
26. gutierrez, m.g., munafo, d.b., beron, w. and colombo, m.i. (2004)
rab7 is required for the normal progression of the autophagic pathway in
mammalian cells. j. cell sci., 117, 2687– 2697.
27. eskelinen, l. (2005) maturation of autophagic vacuoles in mammalian
cells. autophagy, 1, 1 – 10.
28. kabeya, y., mizushima, n., ueno, t., yamamoto, a., kirisako, t.,
noda, t., kominami, e., ohsumi, y. and yoshimori, t. (2000) lc3, a
mammalian homologue of yeast apg8p, is localized in autophagosome
membranes after processing. embo j., 19, 5720– 5728.
29. bampton, e.t.w., goemans, c.g., niranjan, d., mizushima, n. and
tolkovsky, a.m. (2005) the dynamics of autophagy visualized in live
cells. autophagy, 1, 23 – 36.
30. inoki, k., corradetti, m.n. and guan, k.l. (2005) dysregulation of the
tsc-mtor pathway in human disease. nat. genet., 37, 19 – 24.
31. bauer, a.j. and stratakis, c.a. (2005) the lentiginoses: cutaneous
markers of systemic disease and a window to new aspects of
tumourigenesis. j. med. genet., 42, 801 – 810.
32. budovskaya, y.v., stephan, j.s., deminoff, s.j. and herman, p.k. (2005)
an evolutionary proteomics approach identiﬁes substrates of the
camp-dependent protein kinase. proc. natl acad. sci. usa, 102,
13933– 13938.
33. giaever, g., chu, a.m., ni, l., connelly, c., riles, l., veronneau, s.,
dow, s., lucau-danila, a., anderson, k., andre, b. et al. (2002)
functional proﬁling of the saccharomyces cerevisiae genome. nature,
418, 387 – 391.
34. schmelzle, t., beck, t., martin, d.e. and hall, m.n. (2004) activation
of the ras/cyclic amp pathway suppresses a tor deﬁciency in yeast.
mol. cell biol., 24, 338 – 351.
35. bonner, r.f., emmert-buck, m., cole, k., pohida, t., chuaqui, r.,
goldstein, s. and liotta, l.a. (1997) laser capture microdissection:
molecular analysis of tissue. science, 278, 1481– 1483.
36. nadella, k.s. and kirschner, l.s. (2005) disruption of protein kinase a
regulation causes immortalization and dysregulation of d-type cyclins.
cancer res., 65, 10307– 10315.
37. lorenz, h., hailey, d.w. and lippincott-schwartz, j. (2006) fluorescence
protease protection of gfp chimeras to reveal protein topology and
subcellular localization. nat. methods, 3, 205 – 210.
38. ward, t.h., polishchuk, r.s., caplan, s., hirschberg, k. and
lippincott-schwartz, j. (2001) maintenance of golgi structure and
function depends on the integrity of er export. j. cell biol., 155,
557 – 570.
39. groussin, l., kirschner, l.s., vincent-dejean, c., perlemoine, k.,
jullian, e., delemer, b., zacharieva, s., pignatelli, d., carney, j.a.,
luton, j.p. et al. (2002) molecular analysis of the cyclic amp-dependent
protein kinase a (pka) regulatory subunit 1a (prkar1a) gene in
patients with carney complex and primary pigmented nodular
adrenocortical disease (ppnad) reveals novel mutations and clues for
pathophysiology: augmented pka signaling is associated with adrenal
tumorigenesis in ppnad. am. j. hum. genet., 71, 1433– 1442.
40. stratakis, c.a., carney, j.a., kirschner, l.s., willenberg, h.s.,
brauer, s., ehrhart-bornstein, m. and bornstein, s.r. (1999)
synaptophysin immunoreactivity in primary pigmented nodular
adrenocortical disease: neuroendocrine properties of tumors associated
with carney complex. j. clin. endocrinol. metab., 84, 1122– 1128.
41. snapp, e.l., altan, n. and lippincott-schwartz, j. (2003) measuring
protein mobility by photobleaching gfp-chimeras in living cells.
bonifacino, j., dasso, m., harford, j., lippincott-schwartz, j. and
yamada, k. (eds), current protocols in cell biology, john wiley & sons,
new york.