oncogene (2006) 25, 6347–6360
& 2006 nature publishing group all rights reserved 0950-9232/06 $30.00
www.nature.com/onc
review
upstream of the mammalian target of rapamycin: do all roads pass through
mtor?
mn corradetti1,2 and k-l guan1,2,3
1life sciences institute, university of michigan, ann arbor, mi, usa; 2department of biological chemistry, university of michigan,
ann arbor, mi, usa; and 3institute of gerontology, university of michigan, ann arbor, mi, usa
the mammalian target of rapamycin (mtor) is a serine/
threonine kinase that controls many aspects of cellular
physiology, including transcription, translation, cell size,
cytoskeletal organization and autophagy. recent ad-
vances in the mtor signaling ﬁeld have found that
mtor exists in two heteromeric complexes, mtorc1
and mtorc2. the activity of mtorc1 is regulated by
the integration of many signals, including growth factors,
insulin, nutrients, energy availability and cellular stressors
such as hypoxia, osmotic stress, reactive oxygen species
and viral
infection. in this review we highlight recent
advances in the mtor signaling ﬁeld that relate to how
the two mtor complexes are regulated, and we discuss
stress conditions linked to the mtor signaling network
that have not been extensively covered in other reviews.
given the diversity of signals that have been shown to
impinge on mtor, we also speculate on other signal-
transduction pathways that may be linked to mtor in the
future.
oncogene (2006) 25, 6347–6360. doi:10.1038/sj.onc.1209885
keywords: mtor;
translation; mtorc1
rapamycin; akt; cellular
stress;
introduction
‘you may trod me in the very dirt. but still, like dust,
i’ll arise.’
–maya angelou
the story of the drug rapamycin and its cellular target
tor is one that
literally grew from the ground.
rapamycin was ﬁrst isolated from soil samples on the
south paciﬁc island of rapa nui, and surprisingly, the
drug was
subsequently found to have signiﬁcant
immunosuppressive and anti-tumor properties. rapa-
mycin targets a protein aptly named tor, for ‘target of
rapamycin,’ which is a serine/threonine kinase that is
robustly regulated by a diverse array of upstream
signals. over the past 10 years, a considerable amount
correspondence: mn corradetti or professor k-l guan, life sciences
institute, university of michigan, ann arbor, mi 48109, usa.
e-mails: mcorrade@umich.edu, kunliang@umich.edu
of work has been dedicated to elucidating the upstream
regulation of the tor protein in vivo. this work has
been greatly facilitated by the exquisite speciﬁcity of
rapamycin for tor, the conservation of components of
the tor signaling network from yeast to man, and the
signiﬁcant biological phenotypes that are mediated by
tor kinase activity. tor is compelling to study not
only because it is the target of the drug rapamycin, but
also because mammalian tor (mtor) is dysregulated
in an array of human malignancies, metabolic disorders
such as type ii diabetes and a subset of benign tumor
syndromes for which mtor-inhibiting drugs such as
rapamycin have begun to show great promise (inoki
et al., 2005; manning, 2004). moreover, the signaling
networks that lead to tor are compelling to study
because tor regulates a vast range of cellular activities,
including: transcription, translation, cell size, mrna
turnover, protein stability, ribosomal biogenesis, auto-
phagy, long-term neural potentiation, vesicular trafﬁck-
ing and cytoskeletal organization (for reviews on the
downstream regulation of tor, see fingar and blenis
(2004); hay and sonenberg (2004); martin and hall
(2005)). tor also regulates itself through both negative
and positive feedback mechanisms (sarbassov et al.,
2005).
undoubtedly the best described function of mamma-
lian tor is its regulation of translation, and one
mechanism by which mtor regulates translation is by
directly phosphorylating the key translation regulators
p70 ribosomal s6 kinase (s6k) and eukaryotic initiation
factor 4e binding protein 1 (4ebp1) (figure 1). under
basal conditions, s6k and 4ebp1 are bound to a
scaffolding protein, the eukaryotic initiation factor 3
(eif3) translation initiation complex; but upon stimula-
tion, mtor phosphorylates and activates s6k and
4ebp1, causing their dissociation from eif3 (holz et al.,
2005). the phosphorylation of s6k on t389 and 4ebp1
on t37 and t41 are often used as functional readouts of
mtor activity, since these sites are speciﬁcally phos-
phorylated by mtor both in vitro and in vivo and are
inhibited by rapamycin treatment (brown et al., 1995;
brunn et al., 1997). after activation by mtor, s6k
phosphorylates the ribosomal protein s6, leading to an
increase in translation of a subset of mrnas. originally
it was thought that s6k enhanced the translation of
mrnas that contained speciﬁc, repetitive 50-terminal
oligopolypyrimidine (50top) tracts; but more recently it
6348
upstream of mtor
mn corradetti and k-l guan
figure 1 a model illustrating how mtor ﬁts within the insulin/akt signaling network. insulin or insulin-like growth factor initiates
signaling at the insulin receptor, leading to activation of irs1 and pi3k. the lipid products of pi3k, pip3 (i.e. phosphatidylinositol
3,4,5 trisphosphate and phosphatidylinositol 3,4 bisphosphate), recruit both pdk1 and akt to the plasma membrane. akt is
subsequently phosphorylated on t308 by pdk1 and by mtorc2 (consisting of mtor, mlst8 and rictor) on s473, leading to full
activation. akt then phosphorylates numerous targets to promote growth and survival,
including the tsc1/2 complex. by
phosphorylating tsc2, akt inactivates tsc2s gap activity for the small g protein rheb. gtp-bound rheb is a potent activator of
the rapamycin-sensitive complex mtorc1 (consisting of mtor, mlst8 and raptor), but it is unclear whether rheb plays a role in
regulating mtorc2. mtorc1 phosphorylates several targets, including the translation control proteins s6k and 4ebp1. by
phosphorylating and activating s6k, mtorc1 initiates a negative feedback loop to modulate its own activity, via s6k-mediated
reduction in the activation of pi 3-kinase.
initiation
has been suggested that mtor regulates 50top
mrnas independently of s6k (stolovich et al., 2002).
mtor also phosphorylates 4ebp1, and in doing so it
inhibits 4ebp1 function. the net result of this action is
to increase the translation of mrnas with 7-methyl
guanine caps, as 4ebp1 is an inhibitor of the cap-
dependent
eif4e.
it is especially signiﬁcant that mtor leads to enhance-
ment of translation through s6k, 4ebp1 and other
molecules, since it has been postulated that mtor may
serve as a nexus that controls up to 15% of the bulk
translation of the cell (jefferies et al., 1994). moreover,
translation regulation – especially through eif4e –
directly increases the size (and hence the growth) of cells
via regulation of key growth promoting proteins such as
c-myc and cyclin d1 (mamane et al., 2004).
factor
although the regulation of transcription by major
cellular signaling pathways has been extensively studied
owing to the widespread use of microarray analysis, the
study of the regulation of translation is far behind; and
the relative contribution of translation versus transcrip-
tion in modulating cellular phenotypes is only beginning
to be studied (reviewed by prendergast (2003); rajasekhar
and holland (2004); mata et al. (2005)). for example, one
pioneering report showed that the immediate effect of
overexpressing the ras and akt oncogenes in glial
progenitor cells was not to change mrna transcription,
but rather to increase the translation of speciﬁc growth-
and translation-promoting mrnas (rajasekhar et al.,
2003). since mtor serves as an integration point that
relays numerous upstream signals to the translation
apparatus, it is essential to appreciate how it is regulated.
oncogene
in this review, we focus on the upstream regulation of
mtor, outlining several of the major agonists and
antagonists that have been shown to impinge upon the
mtor signaling network in mammalian cells (table 1).
there is a great body of work describing tor signaling
in both ﬂy and yeast model systems that serves as the
bedrock of mammalian tor research; and although we
cannot do justice to the depth and breadth of this work,
we will discuss signiﬁcant similarities and differences in
evolutionary conservation. we will also brieﬂy discuss
how mtor exists in two complexes, mtor complex 1
(mtorc1) and mtor complex 2 (mtorc2) and how
the existence of mtor in these two distinct complexes
has implications for upstream regulation. furthermore,
we speculate that as signaling pathways and cellular
biological
translation,
mtor’s role as a key regulator of translation (and
other aspects of cellular physiology) may mean that
many other signaling pathways will be tied to mtor in
the future.
phenotypes
often
require
upstream of mtor
mn corradetti and k-l guan
mtorc1 and mtorc2
6349
it
family of kinases, but
mtor (also known as frap and raft)
is a
b289 kda member of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
related kinase (pikk)
is
exclusively a protein kinase. it exists in a large multi-
protein complex, approximately 1.5–2 mda in size
when puriﬁed by gel ﬁltration chromatography (kim
et al., 2002; bader and vogt, 2004). despite the fact that
there are few well-characterized mtor-interacting
proteins, the domain architecture of mtor suggests
the existence of signiﬁcant protein–protein interaction.
from n- to c-terminus, mtor contains: 20 heat
repeats, which are protein–protein interaction domains
consisting of two tandem a-helicies that are also found
in the dna damage-sensing kinases rad3-related
kinase atr and ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (atm)
(perry and kleckner, 2003); a focal adhesion targeting
(fat) domain, found in all pikk family members
(bosotti et al., 2000); an frb domain, which binds the
table 1 major agonists and antagonists linked to the mtor signaling network
mtorc1
activation
genes involved
example mechanism
example references
akt, pi3k, erk, rsk
reduction in activity of tsc1/2 via
phosphorylation by erk, p90rsk or akt
potter et al. (2002),
ma et al. (2005a) and
roux et al. (2004)
agonist/antagonist
growth stimulators
egf
pdgf
igf
insulin
many others
hypoxia
hyperosmotic stress
sorbitol
nacl
ros
peroxide
thiol oxidants
uv irradiation
many others
amino-acid depletion
energy depletion
viral infection
hcmv
adenovirus
retroviruses/hiv
hepatitis c
m&k
rtp801/redd1, hif-1 activation tsc1/2 downstream
unknown
m&k
raptor, mtorc1
of hif-1-driven rtp801 expression;
mtorc1 may also regulate hif-1
degradation of the mitochondrial
proton gradient; via an
osmotic-stress inducted phosphatase
unknown; disulﬁde reduction of
mtor itself may play a role
hudson et al. (2002),
arsham et al. (2003) and
brugarolas et al. (2004)
desai et al. (2002) and
parrott and templeton (1999)
sarbassov and
sabatini (2005),
bae et al. (1999) and
smith et al. (2005)
hara et al. (1998),
gao et al. (2002) and
smith et al. (2005)
rheb, raptor, hvps34,
hvps15
several competing hypotheses
proposed
lkb1, ampk
increase in tsc1/2 activity via
phosphorylation by ampk
inoki et al. (2003b) and
corradetti et al. (2004)
adenovirus: e4-orf1,
e4-orf4
hcmv: egfr
several mechanisms,
depends on infecting virus
o’shea et al. (2005a) and
kudchodkar et al. (2004)
dna damaging agents
etoposide
methyl methane-sulfonate
many others
p53, rtp801/redd1
several proposed mechanisms,
including upregulation of p53
beuvink et al. (2005) and
tee and proud (2000)
abbreviations: ampk, 50 adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase; egf, epidermal growth factor; hcmv, human cytomegalovius;
hiv, human immunodeﬁciency virus; hif, hypoxia inducible factor; igf, inducible growth factor; mtor, mammalian target of rapamycin;
pdgf, platelet-derived growth factor; ros, reactive oxygen species; uv, ultraviolet.
oncogene
6350
upstream of mtor
mn corradetti and k-l guan
rapamycin- fk506-binding protein (fkbp)12 complex
(chiu et al., 1994); the kinase domain; and a focal
adhesion targeting c-terminal domain (fatc), which is
a second fat domain at the c-terminus. as mtor is
such a large molecule it is possible that other functional
domains that are not obvious from its primary sequence
will be identiﬁed in the future.
in the yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae, there are two
tor genes, tor1 and tor2, which share several
functions,
including translation, ribosome biogenesis,
amino-acid transport and autophagy. unlike tor1,
tor2 has certain functions that cannot be inhibited by
rapamycin,
including the unique function of actin
cytoskeleton regulation (loewith et al., 2002; jacinto
et al., 2004). the two tor complexes in yeast, torc1
and torc2, have been puriﬁed; and the mammalian
homologs of the torc1 and torc2 proteins that are
conserved between yeast and mammals have also been
discovered. as in yeast, there are two functionally
distinct tor complexes in mammals, mtorc1 and
mtorc2; but unlike yeast, there is only one mtor
protein (figure 1).
it is critical to note that mtorc1 is the only known
target of the drug rapamycin. before binding mtor,
rapamycin must ﬁrst complex with another molecule,
the 12-kda immunopilin fkbp12; and the rapamycin-
fkbp12 complex (but not the fk506-fkbp12 com-
plex) inhibits mtorc1 directly and potently (brown
et al., 1994; chiu et al., 1994; sabatini et al., 1994;
sabers et al., 1995). it is unclear how the rapamycin-
fkbp12 complex is excluded from mtorc2, but the
recent discovery of several components of mtorc1 and
mtorc2 will be of great value in answering this
question.
mtorc1 has recently been shown to consist of the
three proteins mtor, mlst8 (also known as gbl) and
raptor (for regulatory associated protein of mtor),
and largely controls translation and cell growth in
response to nutrients. mtorc2 consists of mtor,
mlst8 and rictor (for rapamycin-insensitive compa-
nion of mtor), and has been shown to control actin
cytoskeleton dynamics (kim et al., 2003; sarbassov
et al., 2004). the mtorc1 component raptor binds
mtor, s6k and 4ebp1, and facilitates mtor
phosphorylation of these molecules; but whether raptor
enhances or represses mtor kinase activity remains
unclear (hara et al., 2002; kim et al., 2002). as is the
case in yeast, mtorc2 is decidedly rapamycin insensi-
tive, and the protein rictor dictates the speciﬁcity of
mtorc2 towards akt (discussed below) and away
from s6k and 4ebp1 (sarbassov et al., 2005). the
adaptor protein mlst8 is common to both complexes.
it has been shown to both increase the kinase activity of
mtorc1 towards s6k and 4ebp1 (kim et al., 2003),
and it also plays a positive role in mtorc2 function in
cell spreading and actin polymerization (jacinto et al.,
2004). over the past 10 years, a great deal of work
involving mtor has focused on the use of rapamycin to
modulate mtor, and s6k and 4ebp1 phosphorylation
have often been used as readouts for mtor activity;
therefore, mtorc1 has been the most extensively
studied mtor complex. much less is known about
the upstream regulation and function of mtorc2 than
is known for mtorc1, although such work will
undoubtedly be an active area of future investigation.
unless speciﬁcally mentioned, instances where ‘mtor’
is mentioned throughout
this review will refer to
mtorc1.
insulin and growth factor signaling to mtor
directly upstream of mtor: tsc1/2 and rheb
a renaissance in the mtor ﬁeld occurred upon the
discovery that the tuberous sclerosis complex (tsc)
gene products, tsc1 and tsc2, act upstream of
mtor. tsc1 and tsc2 are tumor suppressor genes that
are mutated in the disease tsc, a dominantly inherited
disorder characterized by the formation of a distinguish-
ing type of benign tumor – termed hamartoma – in
many organ systems. the proteins tsc1 and tsc2 form
a tight complex in the cell, and the presence of both
proteins is required for the tsc1/2 heterodimer to
function. cells null for tsc1 or tsc2, cells depleted of
tsc1 or tsc2 by rna interference (rnai), and
human and mouse tissues deﬁcient in tsc1 or tsc2, all
have high mtorc1 activity, as measured by s6k and
4ebp1 phosphorylation (gao et al., 2002; goncharova
et al., 2002; inoki et al., 2002; potter et al., 2002). the
discovery of the tsc1/2 complex as an important
negative regulator of mtor is a striking example of
how mammalian biochemistry can complement droso-
phila genetics. tsc1’s and tsc2’s role in cell growth
was originally discovered through a genetic screen in
drosophila for genes, that when mutated, produced
overgrown cells and organs. the observation that tsc1
and tsc2 were two such genes, and the epistatic
analysis that placed them between growth factor signals
and s6k (gao and pan, 2001; potter et al., 2001; tapon
et al., 2001), ultimately led to the overexpression and
downregulation experiments in mammalian cells that
established that tsc1 and tsc2 act upstream of mtor.
a key function of tsc2 is that of a guanine
triphosphate (gtp)ase activating protein (gap) for a
small g protein named rheb (for ras homolog enriched
in brain). again, rheb was discovered to act down-
stream of tsc2 via genetic epistasis analysis
in
drosophila (saucedo et al., 2003; stocker et al., 2003).
independent work in mammalian cells showed that
gtp-bound rheb strongly stimulates mtor activity
both in vitro and in vivo, and tsc2 increases the intrinsic
rate of gtp hydrolysis on rheb to inactivate it (garami
et al., 2003; inoki et al., 2003a; tee et al., 2003b). for
several years, an active search for an intermediary
molecule between rheb and mtor yielded little or no
result, indicating that rheb might be the direct upstream
regulator of mtor in vivo. indeed, recent work in
s. pombe has shown that only a hyperactive, gtp-bound
mutant of rheb (but not wild-type rheb) can form a
complex with tor2 (urano et al., 2005). it has also
been shown in hek293 cells that rheb binds mtor
and mlst8 directly both in vitro and in vivo. puzzlingly,
oncogene
although mutants of rheb that are defective in gtp
binding cannot activate mtor, the binding of rheb to
mtor does not require rheb to be bound to a guanine
nucleotide in any way (long et al., 2005a, b). reconcil-
ing the two observations that gtp is required for rheb
binding to tor2 in s. pombe but not to mtor in
mammalian cells is difﬁcult, and future studies are
needed to clarify the mechanism of rheb in mtor
activation.
the identity of
the putative guanine nucleotide
exchange factor (gef) or guanine nucleotide dissocia-
tion factor (gdi) for rheb also remains a mystery. one
possibility is that a gef or gdi for rheb does not
exist, owing to rheb’s extremely low basal gtpase
activity (li et al., 2004). alternately, it is possible that
no single gef exists, but rather several gefs or gdis
might overlappingly act on rheb. yet another unan-
swered question is how rheb affects mtorc2 activity.
as gtp-bound rheb speciﬁcally binds to tor2 in
s. pombe, it is possible that rheb regulates mtorc2 in
mammalian cells, but whether rheb’s
effect on
mtorc2 is positive or negative is unknown. thus,
the tsc1/2 complex, by increasing gtp hydrolysis on
rheb, leads to decreased mtor activity (figure 1).
insulin/pi3k signaling and mtor
the tsc1/2 complex has been shown to receive inputs
from a diverse set of signal-transduction pathways, and
the list of putative binding partners for tsc1 and tsc2
is fairly long (rosner et al., 2004). predictably, many of
the molecules that have been shown to bind or regulate
the tsc1/2 complex can also regulate mtor. the most
studied and signiﬁcant example of this phenomenon
involves the serine/threonine kinase akt. akt is acti-
vated downstream of growth factors such as insulin or
epidermal growth factor (egf), by both phosphoryla-
tion and by the lipid products of phosphatidylinositol 3-
kinase (pi3k). once activated, akt then phosphorylates
a variety of prosurvival and progrowth targets, and
work performed in cultured mammalian cells has shown
that akt directly phosphorylates and reduces
the
activity of tsc2 (gao et al., 2002; inoki et al., 2002;
potter et al., 2002). by doing so, akt increases signaling
through rheb and mtor.
akt is a particularly potent oncogene, and although it
phosphorylates an array of substrates ostensibly un-
related to tsc1/2 and mtor, akt-driven tumorgenesis
is
remarkably sensitive to mtor inhibition. one
particularly dramatic murine study showed that akt-
driven prostate intraepithelial neoplasia is completely
reversible by the mtor inhibitor rad001 (majumder
et al., 2004). this overall concept – that mtor
represents a primary target of akt in cell growth and
proliferation – was foreshadowed by genetic studies of
the drosophila tor pathway. deletion of tsc1 or tsc2 in
ﬂy organs such as the eye leads to the characteristic
phenotype of overgrown cells and organs, and epistasis
analysis reveals that the overgrowth phenotype caused
by absence of tsc1 or tsc2 is dominant to the decreased
cell and organ size phenotype associated with akt
6351
upstream of mtor
mn corradetti and k-l guan
deﬁciency (potter et al., 2001). moreover, overexpres-
sion of the phosphoinositide phosphatase pten (phos-
phatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome 10)
– which downregulates akt activity by decreasing d3
phosphoinositide concentration – causes an increased
cell size phenotype that is suppressed by the loss of tsc1
or tsc2 (potter et al., 2001). consistent with these data,
loss of drosophila tor (zhang et al., 2000) or s6k
(montagne et al., 1999) also causes a reduced cell size
phenotype, which is dominant to the increased cell size
phenotype that would be expected from pten loss.
what makes the pten/akt/mtor story of such
great importance is that pten mutations in humans
(and the subsequent dysregulation of akt) are asso-
ciated with a subset of benign tumor syndromes as well
as a variety of malignancies (eng, 2003). the rate of
mutation of pten in certain malignancies such as
prostate cancer can be as high as 50%, and murine
models of pten-driven neoplasias have been shown to
be remarkably sensitive to mtor inhibition (neshat
et al., 2001; podsypanina et al., 2001; majumder and
sellers, 2005). akt and/or pten-driven mtor regula-
tion has also been shown to be pathophysiologically
relevant
systems,
including skeletal muscle hypertrophy (bodine et al.,
2001), hematologic disorders (shi et al., 2002; wendel
et al., 2004), and cardiac muscle hypertrophy (shioi
et al., 2002, 2003).
in the context of
several other
it
is not
negative and positive feedback
in normal cells the activation of akt is restrained by
critical negative feedback mechanisms. the existence of
such negative feedback loops was predicted by the
observation that insulin- or growth factor-stimulated
activation of akt tapers off after prolonged treatment
(haruta et al., 2000). although pten is a key down-
regulator of akt signals and an obvious candidate for
the molecule directly
negative feedback,
responsible for decreased akt activity over
time.
instead, several groups have unexpectedly shown that
increased activity of the mtor target s6k (owing to
overexpressed rheb or loss of function of the tsc1/2
complex) reduces expression of insulin receptor sub-
strate (irs-1), the intermediary molecule between the
insulin receptor and pi3k. furthermore, s6k was
shown to directly phosphorylate irs proteins on several
inhibitory sites (haruta et al., 2000; harrington et al.,
2004; shah et al., 2004). taken together, these remark-
able data suggest that chronic s6k activation eventually
leads to insulin resistance, as s6k activation would
eventually decrease the efﬁciency of signaling through
the insulin receptor and irs. consistently, although
s6k-deﬁcient mice have a reduced b-cell mass, reduced
glucose tolerance and decreased insulin secretion, they
are able to maintain normal fasting blood glucose levels
owing to insulin hypersensitivity resulting from loss of
s6k-mediated negative feedback (um et al., 2004).
negative feedback mechanisms may also begin to
explain why tumors lacking tsc1/2 complex function
usually remain benign, rather than progress to malignancy.
oncogene
6352
upstream of mtor
mn corradetti and k-l guan
elegant murine experiments using mice heterozygous for
pten and/or tsc2 have shown that negative feedback-
mediated reduction of the pten/pi3k/akt pathway in
tumors lacking tsc2 likely contributes to their benign
nature. correspondingly, combined tsc2 and pten
heterozygous mice display a severe, synergistic pheno-
type (ma et al., 2005b; manning et al., 2005).
the regulation of akt itself is also of great interest in
the context of mtor signaling. akt is ﬁrst activated by
the lipid products of pi3-kinase (d3 phosphoinositides),
and subsequently by direct phosphorylation on two
sites, t308 and s473. the kinase that phosphorylates
akt on t308 is 3-phosphoinositide-dependent protein
kinase-1 (pdk1), an agc kinase that is recruited by d3
phosphoinositides. the identity of
the pdk2 that
phosphorylates s473 in vivo has been debated for over
10 years, and it has variously been suggested to be akt
itself, dna-protein kinase (dna-pk), integrin linked
kinase (ilk), protein kinase c (pkc)a, atm and other
kinases as well (dong and liu, 2005). however, a recent
report by sarbassov et al. (2005) surprisingly demon-
strates that the pdk2 for akt is, in fact, mtorc2. via
a series of rnai and overexpression experiments in
drosophila and mammalian cells, mtorc2 was shown
to be required for s473 phosphorylation of akt in vivo.
thus, the ﬁnding that akt is regulated by mtor
through both positive and negative feedback loops
makes upstream and downstream relationships some-
what difﬁcult to deﬁne (figure 1). the signiﬁcance of the
relative contribution of mtorc1/s6k/irs versus
mtorc2 in the regulation of akt remains to be seen.
a key question of
future investigation will be to
determine how the stochiometry of the components of
mtorc1 and mtorc2 contributes to their function in
regulating akt. it is known, for example, that long-term
administration of rapamycin can lead to a moderate
decrease in akt activation (edinger et al., 2003), an
observation that is at odds with the predicted role of
negative feedback through s6k and irs. sarbassov
et al. propose that long-term rapamycin treatment may
sequester mtor away from mtorc2, thereby leading
to decreased s473 phosphorylation and akt activation.
several other situations could also be imagined where
stoichiometry would be signiﬁcant. as mlst8 is the
common component of both mtor complexes, future
investigation is required to determine whether it plays
a role in regulating the ratio of mtorc1 versus
mtorc2 in the cell.
other growth regulatory pathways that affect tsc1/2
and mtor
the mitogen-activated protein kinases (mapks) rsk1
and erk have also been shown to regulate mtorc1 in
response to growth stimulators such as phorbol esters
and egf, respectively (roux et al., 2004; ma et al.,
2005a). both rsk1 and erk were found to phosphor-
ylate and inhibit
the function of tsc2, albeit via
different mechanisms and at different phosphorylation
sites. notably, erk-driven tumorigenesis in tsc2 þ / 
tumor cells was shown to be blocked by an erk-
nonphosphorylatable tsc2 mutant, but reintroduction
of wild-type tsc2 was ineffective in suppressing tumor
growth (ma et al., 2005a). it is also worthwhile to note
that agonists which activate pkc such as phorbol 12-
myristate 13-acetate can also regulate mtor via pkc-
mediated activation of ras and raf (iijima et al., 2002;
tee et al., 2003a). collectively, these ﬁndings place the
ras/mapk pathway – independently of ras’s ability to
activate pi3k – upstream of the tsc1/2 complex. the
ﬁndings are of added signiﬁcance since nf1, the gene
mutated in the neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 hamartoma
tumor syndrome, codes for a ras gap that has been
shown to regulate tsc2 and mtor through the ras/
mapk signal-transduction cascade (johannessen et al.,
2005).
regulation of the mtor pathway by the tumor
suppressor gene p53 has also been an active area of
investigation. the p53 protein is upregulated and
protected from degradation in response to dna
damage and other agonists,
functioning in both
apoptosis initiation and cell cycle exit. recently, it has
been shown that p53 negatively regulates mtor, as
measured by s6k and 4ebp1 activity (horton et al.,
2002; constantinou and clemens, 2005; feng et al.,
2005). the suggested mechanism is that p53 activates
tsc1/2 and mtor in response to energy stress through
the 50 adenosine monophosphate-activated protein
kinase (ampk) (see below for a discussion of ampk)
(feng et al., 2005). however,
two other seemingly
conﬂicting possibilities have also been suggested, as it
has also been proposed that p53 acts parallel to mtor
(jones et al., 2005), and downstream of mtor as one of
its substrates (castedo et al., 2002; tirado et al., 2003).
given the complexity of p53 regulation in different cell
types, at different stages of the cell cycle, and in response
to different agonists, considerable future investigation is
required to determine its true physiological role with
respect to mtor.
many other growth regulatory proteins interact with
the tsc1/2 complex and thereby regulate mtor.
several molecules critical for cell cycle progression have
recently been shown to interact with tsc1 or tsc2 in
mammalian cells, including: d-type cyclins (zacharek
et al., 2005), polo-like kinase 1 (astrinidis et al., 2006)
and the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p27 (rosner
and hengstschlager, 2004), these ﬁndings are not
surprising; well before the mammalian homolog of
tor was discovered,
it was surmised that whatever
molecule rapamycin targeted must have a signiﬁcant
effect on cell cycle progression, given the profound
effects of rapamycin treatment in t lymphocytes and in
yeast (sabers et al., 1995). other growth regulatory
proteins that have been shown to affect mtor via
tsc1/2 include the smad (mothers against decapen-
taplegic) proteins (birchenall-roberts et al., 2004), the
focal adhesion kinase interacting protein fip200 (gan
et al., 2005), the estrogen receptor (finlay et al., 2004)
and many more than space will allow us to mention in
detail. as mouse models have been dramatically
successful
in demonstrating the relevance of insulin-
and akt-mediated mtor activation, future study of the
oncogene
many biochemical observations listed above will require
similar experiments to be performed.
mtor, nutrients and cellular energy
along with the maintenance of osmotic neutrality,
translation and ribosome biogenesis are among the
most energetically intensive processes that a cell must
perform (schmidt, 1999). therefore, it is not unexpected
that these processes must be closely regulated during
times of low atp (adenosine triphosphate) or nutrient
(amino acid) availability. it has been known for several
years that culturing cells under low nutrient conditions
leads
to a strong reduction in s6k and 4ebp1
phosphorylation, a result that is satisfyingly consistent
with mtor’s role in translation regulation (hara et al.,
1998). nutrient sensation by tor is highly conserved in
all eukaryotic organisms tested, including plants, yeast
and the ﬂy (reviewed by shamji et al., 2003; fingar and
blenis, 2004; hay and sonenberg, 2004; menand et al.,
2004; proud, 2004b; avruch et al., 2005). tor has even
been shown to be the sensor responsible for turning on
egg development
in the malarial mosquito after it
consumes its nutrient-laden blood meal (hansen et al.,
2004). however, despite the strong conservation of tor
as a nutrient sensor, there is a signiﬁcant lack of
agreement on a unifying mechanism to explain how
tor is regulated in response to nutrients.
for instance,
it has been proposed that nutrients
activate mtor in both a tsc1/2-dependent (gao et al.,
2002) and tsc1/2-independent (smith et al., 2005)
fashion. some studies suggest that rheb is integral to
nutrient sensing, as overexpressed rheb has been shown
to override nutrient deprivation signals to mtor (inoki
et al., 2003a), and nutrient deprivation signals may
decrease rheb binding to mtor (long et al., 2005b).
other work implies that rheb may not be involved at
all, but rather that nutrient poor conditions lead to
increased raptor/mtor binding and subsequently
decreased mtorc1 activity (kim et al., 2002). other
studies point to hvps34, a class iii pi3k (unrelated to
the pi3k that is upstream of akt), as a critical factor in
the regulation of tor by nutrients (byﬁeld et al., 2005;
nobukuni et al., 2005). hvps34 was shown to be
activated by the presence of amino acids and is inhibited
by ampk, but the mechanism by which it regulates
mtor is unknown. the hvps34 data are consistent
with nutrient sensation acting through a pathway
parallel to the tsc/rheb signaling axis, but are directly
in contrast to the evidence that tsc1/2 is in fact
required for nutrient sensation. thus, it is clear that the
mechanism of nutrient sensation by mtor requires
considerable future investigation.
study of how cellular energy regulates mtor has
recently made signiﬁcant progress. culturing mamma-
lian cells under low glucose conditions or treating them
with the non-hydrolysable glucose analog 2-deoxyglu-
cose (2-dg), depletes the energy of the cell and causes a
concomitant decrease in the activity of mtor (dennis
upstream of mtor
mn corradetti and k-l guan
6353
et al., 2001). one mechanism proposed to account for
decreased mtor activity is that mtor itself senses
energy depletion and decreases its activation accordingly
(dennis et al., 2001). however, this mechanism may
only account for conditions of severe energy stress, as
the atp depletion required to achieve mtor inhibition
is below the normal range of physiological atp levels
(inoki et al., 2003b).
a more plausible mechanism to explain how energy
levels couple to the regulation of mtor is via activation
of ampk. ampk is activated allosterically by amp as
well as by phosphorylation on its activation loop
threonine, t172. a high amount of amp in the cell
reﬂects a low energy status, and the amp/atp ratio in
the cell is much higher during energy stress. studies
which ﬁrst
implicated ampk in the regulation of
mtor showed that pharmacological activation of
ampk by the ribonucleoside amp analog aicar
caused a dramatic reduction of s6k and 4ebp1 activity;
and culturing cells in low glucose or treating cells with 2-
dg had the same effect of reducing mtor activation
(bolster et al., 2002; krause et al., 2002; kimura et al.,
2003). in response to low energy, ampk phosphor-
ylates
to enhance catabolism and
suppress anabolism, and it was recently shown that the
mechanism by which it regulates mtor is via direct
phosphorylation of tsc2 (inoki et al., 2003b). phos-
phorylation of tsc2 by ampk is
required for
translation regulation and cell size control in response
to energy deprivation, and when ampk phosphoryla-
tion sites are absent on tsc2, energy depletion has little
or no effect on mtor activation. furthermore, cells
either null for tsc2 or those that express mutants of
tsc2 that cannot be phosphorylated by ampk under-
go quick apoptosis under energy starvation conditions
(inoki et al., 2003b). thus, energy depletion is sensed by
ampk and relayed to mtor through the tsc1/2
complex (figure 2).
several
targets
it is critical to note that full activation of ampk is
only achieved after phosphorylation on its activation
loop by lkb1, a serine/threonine kinase that exists in a
multi-protein complex with two adaptor molecules,
strad and mo25 (baas et al., 2003; woods et al.,
2003). by phosphorylating ampk, lkb1 also signiﬁ-
cantly affects signaling through mtor; and lkb1
kinase activity is required for ampk activation, as
ampk activity in response to low energy conditions is
deﬁcient in lkb1 null cells (corradetti et al., 2004). it is
especially signiﬁcant that lkb1 is upstream of mtor,
as
syndrome, an
autosomal dominant hamartoma syndrome that shares
certain clinical similarities with tsc (inoki et al., 2005).
moreover, lkb1 heterozygous mice, which phenocopy
human peutz-jeghers syndrome, display elevated s6k
phosphorylation in hamartomatous tissues (shaw et al.,
2004). it has also recently been shown that mice with a
tissue-speciﬁc deﬁciency of lkb1 in the liver display
certain diabetic phenotypes such as hyperglycemia and
increased lipogenic gene expression (shaw et al., 2005).
this is not surprising, as the commonly used antidia-
betic drug metformin has been shown to directly
is mutated in peutz-jeghers
it
oncogene
6354
upstream of mtor
mn corradetti and k-l guan
figure 2 energy and cellular stress signaling couple to mtor. cellular stressors that initiate signal transduction are shown in red
text. under low energy conditions, ampk is activated by both amp and its upstream kinase, lkb1. ampk then phosphorylates and
activates tsc2 in order to downregulate mtor activity. hypoxia is shown playing the dual role of both activating hif-1 translation
in an mtorc1-dependent manner, as well as downregulating mtorc1 activity through the action of rtp801. rtp801 is also
inducted in response to dna damage, glucocorticoids and other stressors.
activate ampk (zhou et al., 2001) and requires lkb1
to function (shaw et al., 2005). finally, lkb1 has also
recently been shown to phosphorylate 13 other kinases
that are phylogenetically related to ampk (lizcano
et al., 2004). the relevance of these kinases in the
regulation of mtor has not been demonstrated, but it
is possible that some of these kinases may also regulate
mtor via phosphorylation of tsc2.
regulation of mtor by cellular stressors
the list of cellular stressors that have been shown to
regulate mtor in cell culture systems is staggering and
includes hypoxia, osmotic stress, dna damage, ultra-
violet (uv) and ionizing radiation, viral infection and
reactive oxygen species (ros) (proud, 2004a). as is the
case for energy or nutrient metabolism, most stressors
suppress translation, as translation is an energy intensive
metabolic process that must be downregulated during
times of cellular crisis. many stressors also eventually
lead to atp depletion and thereby activate ampk
(hardie, 2004). however, although ampk activation is
one mechanism by which mtor could be suppressed by
stress, several other mechanisms have been proposed to
explain how mtor is regulated during shorter time
periods, when atp levels may still be in the normal
range. below we mention stress conditions that have
been linked to the mtor signaling network and have
not been extensively covered in other reviews.
hypoxia
under conditions of low oxygen (hypoxia), transcription
and translation of many stress responsive genes is
increased. one such gene, the hypoxia inducible factor
(hif-1), is a critical transcription factor that regulates
many genes directly involved in angiogenesis, including
the vascular endothelial growth factor. von-hippel
lindau disease, a syndrome of abnormal hypervascular-
ization, is caused by mutations in vhl, a gene that
promotes ubiquitination and degradation of hif-1.
mouse models of vhl null kidney cancer (which have
pathologically elevated levels of hif-1) and mouse
models of akt-driven prostate cancer both display
transcription proﬁles consistent with high hif-1 activ-
ity, and both tumor types are dramatically sensitive to
inhibitors of mtor (majumder et al., 2004; thomas
et al., 2006). furthermore,
in osteoblasts, prostate
cancer cells and tsc null ﬁbroblasts, mtor has been
shown to increase hif-1 translation (but not transcrip-
tion) in a rapamycin reversible manner (hudson et al.,
2002; brugarolas et al., 2003). taken together, these
results suggest a role for mtor as an upstream
regulator of responses to hypoxia (figure 2).
oncogene
inhibition of mtor activity. this effect
somewhat paradoxically, it was also recently shown
that mtor acts downstream of hypoxia, as culturing
several cell types under hypoxic conditions can induce a
robust
is
independent of ampk activation and the energy status
of the cell and is dominant to activators of mtor such as
insulin, amino acids, phorbol esters and serum (arsham
et al., 2003); but it is dependent on an intact tsc1/2
complex, as hypoxic treatment of tsc1 or tsc2 null
mouse embryonic ﬁbroblasts (mefs) fails to have any
effect on s6k phosphorylation (brugarolas et al., 2004).
one mechanism proposed to account
for this result
involves a protein called rtp801 (also known as redd1).
rtp801 is a small, 34 kda protein that displays little
homology to known functional domains other than a
coiled-coil domain in its c-terminus (ellisen et al., 2002).
rtp801 is the human orthologue of the drosophila genes
scylla and charybdis, which were identiﬁed in a screen for
proteins that suppress a pdk1/akt-driven ‘bigeye’ cell size
phenotype (reiling and hafen, 2004). scylla and char-
ybdis are induced under hypoxic conditions and were
shown via epistasis anaylsis to act between akt and the
tsc1/2 complex in suppressing cell growth (reiling and
hafen, 2004). subsequently, the human orthologues of
scylla and charybdis, rtp801 and rtp801l, were shown
to negatively regulate mtor downstream of akt and
upstream of the tsc1/2 complex (figure 2) (brugarolas
et al., 2004; corradetti et al., 2005). rtp801 is tran-
scriptionally induced by hif-1 under conditions of
hypoxia (shoshani et al., 2002) and is required for the
effect of hypoxia on mtor, as rtp801 null mefs are
defective in hypoxia-mediated inhibition of s6k (brugar-
olas et al., 2004). however, the detailed mechanism by
which rtp801 mediates mtor inhibition in response to
hif-1 remains a mystery.
the two observations – that mtor is both regulated
by hif-1 through rtp801 and that mtor affects hif-1
expression itself – seem to be at odds with each other.
one explanation that begins to reconcile these observa-
tions is that rapamycin treatment only causes a partial
(less than 50%) reduction in hif-1 expression, indicat-
ing mtor-independent pathways also affect hif-1
expression (brugarolas et al., 2003). it is also possible
that hypoxia-mediated inhibition of mtor by rtp801
occurs only at shorter time points, whereas hif-1
upregulation by mtor only occurs after an extended
period of time. notably, rtp801 has also been shown
to be induced in response to energy stress (sofer et al.,
2005), arsenic and hydrogen peroxide (lin et al., 2005),
glucocorticoid treatment (wang et al., 2003b), dna
(ellisen et al., 2002) and other
damaging agents
stressors. future investigation is required to determine
the signiﬁcance of rtp801 in relaying these additional
stresses to mtor. it will also be interesting to determine
whether rtp801 possesses catalytic activity, whether it
serves as an adaptor protein, or whether it has some
other, mechanism of action.
osmotic stress
osmotic stress is a general term that refers to a change in
the concentration of dissolved molecules in the exterior
upstream of mtor
mn corradetti and k-l guan
6355
environment of
the cell. the term ‘osmotic stress’
usually refers to hyperosmotic stress, or the condition
in which the concentration of solutes outside the cell is
higher than the concentration inside the cell. at low-to-
moderate concentrations, addition of an osmolite such
as sorbitol or mannitol to the cell culture medium can
cause transcription or translation changes, alterations in
metabolism and cellular shrinkage. at higher concen-
trations osmotic shock can lead to apoptotic or necrotic
cell death.
cells
treatment of
it has been known for decades that hypertonic stress
induced by sorbitol
reversibly
decreases the phosphorylation of s6k, as well as the
overall translational output of the cell (saborio et al.,
1974; kruppa and clemens, 1984), but mechanisms to
explain how this occurs have only recently been
proposed. one suggested mechanism is that osmotic
stress induced by sorbitol treatment causes a rapid and
reversible disintegration of the mitochondrial proton
gradient. this reduction in mitochondrial function is
postulated to be linked with downregulation of mtor
activity, as mtor has been shown to associate with the
mitochondrial outer membrane (desai et al., 2002).
these results could imply that mtor itself senses
changes in osmotic stress, perhaps via the mitochondrial
membrane potential or through mitochondrial proteins.
another mechanism suggests that the reduction of
mtor activity by sorbitol may be due to the activation
of a phosphatase, as the phosphatase inhibitor calyculin
a (but not other phosphatase inhibitors) was shown to
prevent osmotic
stress-induced inhibition of s6k
(parrott and templeton, 1999). consistent with these
data, osmotic stress-mediated dephosphorylation of
s6k is independent of tsc2 (smith et al., 2005),
independent of rheb (inoki et al., 2003a) and dominant
to akt overexpression (parrott and templeton, 1999).
the reduction in mtor activity in response to sorbitol
was also shown to be independent of p38 mapk, a
kinase that is activated by a variety of stress stimuli
including osmotic stress and uv radiation (parrott and
templeton, 1999; patel et al., 2002). this kinase was
important to exclude, not only because of p38’s central
role as a stress-inducted kinase, but also because p38
phosphorylates and activates mk2 (also known as
mapkapk2); and mk2 is directly responsible for the
phosphorylation of tsc2 on s1210 (li et al., 2003).
however no physiological
linkage between sorbitol-
mediated inhibition of mtor and tsc2 phosphoryla-
tion on s1210 has been found.
it also bears mentioning that experiments performed
in the plant arabidopsis showed that osmotic stress
induced by mannitol dramatically reduced s6k phos-
phorylation. this osmotic response was reversible by
overexpression of raptor, and interestingly, transgenic
plants expressing high levels of s6k were rendered
hyperresponsive to osmotic stress-mediated cell shrink-
age (mahfouz et al., 2006). although it is certain that
these results demonstrate an impressive evolutionary
conservation of components of the mtor signaling
network, it is not clear whether in higher eukaryotes
raptor plays a role in osmotic stress sensation, or
oncogene
6356
upstream of mtor
mn corradetti and k-l guan
whether s6k overexpression can induce such a dramatic
response to osmotic stress. it should also be mentioned
that osmotic stress induced by high salt concentration
has recently been shown to inhibit mtor (naegele and
morley, 2004), but whether salt-induced osmotic stress
acts via the same mechanism as sorbitol-induced stress is
unclear. in the future it will be interesting to determine
whether a phosphatase is responsible for osmotic stress-
induced s6k dephosphorylation, whether some un-
known component of the pathway relays osmotic stress
sensation to mtor, or whether mtor senses osmotic
stress by itself.
ros
all aerobic organisms produce ros as a byproduct of
respiration. ros molecules such as hydroxyl radicals,
superoxide anions and singlet oxygen are extremely
reactive; and unless they are detoxiﬁed by antioxidant
enzymes, they can cause irreversible damage to intra-
cellular molecules such as nucleic acids and proteins.
although low levels of ros are normally produced by
the mitochondria and are usually detoxiﬁed quickly, an
excessive accumulation of ros – caused by uv or
ionizing irradiation, chemical insult, or an aging cell –
may trigger a diverse range of cellular responses,
including cell growth, proliferation, or apoptosis.
complicating matters further, the effect of oxidizing
agents seems to vary with the cell type tested, the dose
and type of
the oxidizing agent and the time of
treatment (boonstra and post, 2004; temple et al.,
2005). consistent with these observations, oxidizing
agents have been shown to affect the mtor pathway
both positively and negatively.
for example, short-term hydrogen peroxide treatment
(a strong oxidizing agent) has been shown to profoundly
inhibit translation, as well as the phosphorylation of
s6k and 4ebp1 in cho k1 (chinese hamster ovary)
cells, but nearly identical treatment of tsc2 /  mefs
led to an increase in s6k phosphorylation (patel et al.,
2002; smith et al., 2005). the response of tsc2 / 
mefs to peroxide is somewhat puzzling, as basal ros
levels are signiﬁcantly higher in tsc2 /  cells, as a result
of increased mitochondrial function (finlay et al., 2005).
moreover, peroxide or arsenite treatment of jb6 cells
(a mouse epidermal cell type) has been shown to lead to
an increase in s6k and 4ebp1 activation (bae et al.,
1999; huang et al., 2002; jung et al., 2003). in addition,
uv irradiation (which increases the amount of ros in
the cell) of hek293 cells (parrott and templeton, 1999)
and jb6 cells (huang et al., 2002) has been shown to
increase the phosphorylation of s6k. it should be noted
that the oxidizing agents arsenic and hydrogen peroxide
have also been shown to induce the transcription of
rtp801 (lin et al., 2005), although the inhibition of
mtor by rtp801 occurs at a much later time point
than the activation of mtor by peroxide and arsenic.
it has also been reported in hek293 cells that s6k
phosphorylation is
increased in response to thiol
oxidizing agents that speciﬁcally target disulﬁde bonds.
this effect is dominant to mtor inhibiting conditions,
such as nutrient or energy deprivation, but not to
inhibitors of pi3k and mtor. thiol oxidation also
induces destabilization of the raptor-mtor interaction
(sarbassov and sabatini, 2005), consistent with previous
data that showed the raptor-mtor interaction is
stabilized by mtor inhibiting agents (kim et al.,
2002). recent work in yeast suggests that mtor itself
may sense changes in the thiol reduction status of the
cell, as the fatc domain of tor1 possesses a novel
disulﬁde-bonded structural motif that is changed dra-
matically when reduced (dames et al., 2005). thus, a
considerable amount of future work is required to
determine the physiological relevance of ros in the
regulation of mtor.
viruses and mtor
the cell’s response to the stress of viral infection can be
either adaptive or maladaptive. viral proteins,
for
instance, can hijack the cell growth apparatus (a
maladaptive event for the cell) in order to produce
more viral particles and thereby increase infection. this
phenomenon is well
illustrated by the dna tumor
viruses, which possess proteins that mimic or bind to
cellular oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes in order
to promote cell growth (o’shea, 2005). in contrast,
certain viral infection conditions have also been shown
to lead to an adaptive response, such as enhancement of
apoptotic cell death or the upregulation of autophagy
(to degrade intracellular pathogens). study of the role
of mtor in these processes is relatively new, but
both adaptive and maladaptive responses have been
observed. upregulation of mtor activity is associated
with increased cellular synthesis of viral particles and
increased cell growth. downregulation of mtor
activity is associated with increased autophagy, reduced
cell growth and protection from further infection. here
we discuss adenoviruses and cytomegaloviruses, two
types of viruses that have been well studied with respect
to their positive regulation of the mtor signaling
network.
adenoviruses are double-stranded dna viruses that
have been extensively characterized with respect to their
effect on cellular signal transduction, and they are
responsible for a wide range of common respiratory
infections. recently it has been shown that adenoviral
infection of airway epithelial cells – a typical cell type
targeted by adenoviruses in vivo – causes dramatic
increases in the activation of mtor, even under low
nutrient conditions; and signiﬁcantly, mtor activation
is required for infected cells to efﬁciently progress to
s phase (o’shea et al., 2005a). the activation of mtor
was shown to be caused by two adenovirus-encoded
proteins. the ﬁrst protein, e4-orf1, is both necessary
and sufﬁcient to activate pi3k by adenovirus infection.
however, e4-orf1 is not required to activate mtor,
as e4-orf1-deleted adenoviruses are still able to
partially induce s6k (frese et al., 2003; o’shea et al.,
2005a). a second protein, e4-orf4, was shown to be
essential for mtor activation by adenoviral infection.
interestingly, e4-orf4 does not affect rheb gtp levels,
oncogene
but its protein phosphatase 2a binding domain is required
for s6k activation (o’shea et al., 2005a). taken together,
these data indicate that adenoviruses have evolved
mechanisms to commandeer control of
the mtor
is required for efﬁcient
pathway, and such control
adenovirus propagation. the results also have implica-
tions for adenoviral gene therapy research. for instance,
engineered adenoviruses
that are defective in their
activation of essential growth regulatory genes such as
retinoblastoma protein (prb) can only replicate in – and
thereby kill – tumor cells with a hyperactive prb
pathway, potentially sparing cells with normal prb
activity (johnson et al., 2002). one could imagine the
creation of similar e4-orf1 and e4-orf4 adenoviral
mutants that are deﬁcient in activation of mtor, in order
to speciﬁcally treat tumors with increased mtor activity
(o’shea et al., 2005b). paradoxically, it should be noted
that it has also been shown that the mtor inhibitor
rad001 increases the efﬁcacy of replicating adenoviruses
used for colon cancer ablation (homicsko et al., 2005).
human cytomegalovius (hcmv)
is an extremely
common herpesvirus family member that is usually of
little clinical consequence in healthy individuals. how-
ever, hcmv infection in immunocompromised patients
such as transplant recipients and acquired immuno-
deﬁciency syndrome patients can be a signiﬁcant cause
of morbidity and mortality. hcmv enters cells by
binding to the epidermal growth factor
receptor
(egfr). upon binding, hcmv is internalized and
initiates typical egfr signaling, including the activa-
tion of pi3k and akt (wang et al., 2003a). subse-
quently, the phosphorylation of both s6k (johnson
et al., 2001; andreoni et al., 2002) and 4ebp1
(kudchodkar et al., 2004) is strongly induced, although
one group ﬁnds that 4ebp1 is induced independently of
pi3k (kudchodkar et al., 2004). pi3k/akt activation is
especially signiﬁcant as hcmv replication and viral
gene expression is signiﬁcantly reduced by the pi3k
inhibitor ly294002 (johnson et al., 2001). the im-
portance of mtor inhibition in preventing hcmv
pathogenesis was compellingly shown in the context of a
double-blind clinical study of heart transplant recipi-
ents. patients
received the mtor inhibitor
rad001 and cyclosporine for immunosuppression had
a signiﬁcantly lower incidence of hcmv infection and
vasculopathy compared to patients that received cyclos-
porine and azathioprine (eisen et al., 2003). similar
reductions in hcmv infection by mtor inhibition
were found in liver and kidney transplant patients
(reviewed by ponticelli (2004)). these data indicate that
mtor may be essential
for hcmv infection and
propagation in vivo, and suggest that the use of mtor
inhibitors for immunosuppression may be preferable to
other drugs, at least from the perspective of reducing
that
upstream of mtor
mn corradetti and k-l guan
hcmv infection. as the biochemical data to support
the observations made in the clinic are still somewhat
lacking, it will be critical to more extensively determine
the mechanism of how mtor inhibition prevents the
pathogenic effects of hcmv.
6357
conclusions
although mtor was discovered over 10 years ago and
rapamycin has been used in the clinic for an even longer
time, there are still many unanswered questions regard-
ing the regulation of the mtor signaling network. it is
clear that mtor is affected by an enormous variety of
cellular stressors and cell growth regulators, leading to
the question: how many undiscovered links still exist
between mtor and other agonists, stresses and cell
growth signaling pathways? the best piece of evidence
that supports greater complexity in upstream signaling is
the many agonists that have already been shown to
impinge upon mtor. in addition, mtor knockout
mice are embryonic lethal as early as e5 and have
defects in embryonic stem cell growth (gangloff et al.,
2004; murakami et al., 2004), implying the mtor plays
a central role in primordial development. the fact that
mtor may control a low percentage (perhaps 15%) of
the translational output of the cell (jefferies et al., 1994)
has often been cited as a reason why mtor is not a
nexus for translation regulation. although this may be
so, any protein that nonredundantly controls 15% of
mrnas must presumably be regulated by pathways
that require these mrnas to function. little is known
about regulation of the mtor signaling network by
agonists such as wnt, hedgehog and notch, yet the study
of these three signaling pathways represent a signiﬁcant
portion of current research in developmental biology
and oncogenesis. future investigation should be aimed
at determining the relationships between such types of
agonists and mtor. the fact that mtor is dysregu-
lated in many human diseases and that rapamycin may
be therapeutically useful to treat them highlights the
necessity of understanding how mtor integrates
numerous upstream signals to control the cell.
acknowledgements
we thank eunjung kim, heather krueger, chung-han
lee and hong-jiao ouyang for critical reading of
this
manuscript. we apologize to those authors whose work
could not be cited owing to space limitations or our inability
to draw connections between elements of
the primary
literature. m.n.c. is supported by a grant from the program
in organogenesis (5-t32-hd075005), and the work of the
authors is supported by grants from the national institutes of
heath and the walther cancer institute.
references
andreoni ka, wang x, huang sm, huang es. (2002). j med
astrinidis a, senapedis w, henske ep. (2006). hum mol
virol 67: 33–40.
genet 15: 287–297.
arsham am, howell jj, simon mc. (2003). j biol chem 278:
avruch j, lin y, long x, murthy s, ortiz-vega s. (2005).
29655–29660.
curr opin clin nutr metab care 8: 67–72.
oncogene
6358
upstream of mtor
mn corradetti and k-l guan
baas af, boudeau j, sapkota gp, smit l, medema r,
morrice na et al. (2003). embo j 22: 3062–3072.
bader ag, vogt pk. (2004). oncogene 23: 3145–3150.
bae gu, seo dw, kwon hk, lee hy, hong s, lee zw et al.
(1999). j biol chem 274: 32596–32602.
beuvink i, boulay a, fumagalli s, zilbermann f, ruetz s,
o’reilly t et al. (2005). cell 120: 747–759.
birchenall-roberts mc, fu t, bang os, dambach m,
resau jh, sadowski cl et al. (2004). j biol chem 279:
25605–25613.
gao x, pan d. (2001). genes dev 15: 1383–1392.
gao x, zhang y, arrazola p, hino o, kobayashi t, yeung
rs et al. (2002). nat cell biol 4: 699–704.
garami a, zwartkruis fj, nobukuni t, joaquin m, roccio
m, stocker h et al. (2003). mol cell 11: 1457–1466.
goncharova ea, goncharov da, eszterhas a, hunter ds,
glassberg mk, yeung rs et al. (2002). j biol chem 277:
30958–30967.
hansen ia, attardo gm, park jh, peng q, raikhel as.
(2004). proc natl acad sci usa 101: 10626–10631.
bodine sc, stitt tn, gonzalez m, kline wo, stover gl,
hara k, maruki y, long x, yoshino k, oshiro n, hidayat s
bauerlein r et al. (2001). nat cell biol 3: 1014–1019.
et al. (2002). cell 110: 177–189.
bolster dr, crozier sj, kimball sr, jefferson ls. (2002).
hara k, yonezawa k, weng qp, kozlowski mt, belham c,
j biol chem 277: 23977–23980.
boonstra j, post ja. (2004). gene 337: 1–13.
bosotti r, isacchi a, sonnhammer el.
biochem sci 25: 225–227.
(2000). trends
avruch j. (1998). j biol chem 273: 14484–14494.
hardie dg. (2004). j cell sci 117: 5479–5487.
harrington ls, findlay gm, gray a, tolkacheva t, wigﬁeld
s, rebholz h et al. (2004). j cell biol 166: 213–223.
brown ej, albers mw, shin tb, ichikawa k, keith ct, lane
haruta t, uno t, kawahara j, takano a, egawa k, sharma
ws et al. (1994). nature 369: 756–758.
brown ej, beal pa, keith ct, chen j, shin tb, schreiber sl.
(1995). nature 377: 441–446.
pm et al. (2000). mol endocrinol 14: 783–794.
hay n, sonenberg n. (2004). genes dev 18: 1926–1945.
holz mk, ballif ba, gygi sp, blenis j. (2005). cell 123:
brugarolas j, lei k, hurley rl, manning bd, reiling jh,
569–580.
hafen e et al. (2004). genes dev 18: 2893–2904.
homicsko k, lukashev a, iggo rd. (2005). cancer res 65:
brugarolas jb, vazquez f, reddy a, sellers wr, kaelin jr
6882–6890.
wg. (2003). cancer cell 4: 147–158.
horton le, bushell m, barth-baus d, tilleray vj, clemens
brunn gj, hudson cc, sekulic a, williams jm, hosoi h,
mj, hensold jo. (2002). oncogene 21: 5325–5334.
houghton pj et al. (1997). science 277: 99–101.
huang c, li j, ke q, leonard ss, jiang bh, zhong xs et al.
byﬁeld mp, murray jt, backer jm. (2005). j biol chem 280:
(2002). cancer res 62: 5689–5697.
33076–33082.
hudson cc, liu m, chiang gg, otterness dm, loomis dc,
castedo m, roumier t, blanco j, ferri kf, barretina j,
kaper f et al. (2002). mol cell biol 22: 7004–7014.
tintignac la et al. (2002). embo j 21: 4070–4080.
iijima y, laser m, shiraishi h, willey cd, sundaravadivel b,
chiu mi, katz h, berlin v. (1994). proc natl acad sci
xu l et al. (2002). j biol chem 277: 23065–23075.
usa 91: 12574–12578.
inoki k, corradetti mn, guan kl. (2005). nat genet 37:
constantinou c, clemens mj. (2005). oncogene 24: 4839–4850.
corradetti mn, inoki k, bardeesy n, depinho ra, guan
19–24.
inoki k, li y, xu t, guan kl. (2003a). genes dev 17:
kl. (2004). genes dev 18: 1533–1538.
1829–1834.
corradetti mn, inoki k, guan kl. (2005). j biol chem 280:
inoki k, li y, zhu t, wu j, guan kl. (2002). nat cell biol 4:
9769–9772.
648–657.
dames sa, mulet jm, rathgeb-szabo k, hall mn, grzesiek
s. (2005). j biol chem 280: 20558–20564.
inoki k, zhu t, guan kl. (2003b). cell 115: 577–590.
jacinto e, loewith r, schmidt a, lin s, ruegg ma, hall a
dennis pb, jaeschke a, saitoh m, fowler b, kozma sc,
et al. (2004). nat cell biol 6: 1122–1128.
thomas g. (2001). science 294: 1102–1105.
jefferies hb, reinhard c, kozma sc, thomas g. (1994). proc
desai bn, myers br, schreiber sl. (2002). proc natl acad
natl acad sci usa 91: 4441–4445.
sci usa 99: 4319–4324.
dong lq, liu f. (2005). am j physiol endocrinol metab 289:
e187–96.
johannessen cm, reczek ee,
james mf, brems h,
legius e, cichowski k. (2005). proc natl acad sci usa
102: 8573–8578.
edinger al, linardic cm, chiang gg, thompson cb,
johnson l, shen a, boyle l, kunich j, pandey k, lemmon m
abraham rt. (2003). cancer res 63: 8451–8460.
et al. (2002). cancer cell 1: 325–337.
eisen hj, tuzcu em, dorent r, kobashigawa j, mancini d,
valantine-von kaeppler ha et al. (2003). n engl j med 349:
847–858.
johnson ra, wang x, ma xl, huong sm, huang es. (2001).
j virol 75: 6022–6032.
jones rg, plas dr, kubek s, buzzai m, mu j, xu y et al.
ellisen lw, ramsayer kd, johannessen cm, yang a, beppu
(2005). mol cell 18: 283–293.
h, minda k et al. (2002). mol cell 10: 995–1005.
jung dk, bae gu, kim yk, han sh, choi ws, kang h
eng c. (2003). hum mutat 22: 183–198.
feng z, zhang h, levine aj, jin s. (2005). proc natl acad sci
usa 102: 8204–8209.
fingar dc, blenis j. (2004). oncogene 23: 3151–3171.
finlay ga, thannickal vj, fanburg bl, kwiatkowski dj.
(2005). cancer res 65: 10881–10890.
finlay ga, york b, karas rh, fanburg bl, zhang h,
kwiatkowski dj et al. (2004). j biol chem 279: 23114–23122.
frese kk, lee ss, thomas dl, latorre ij, weiss rs,
glaunsinger ba et al. (2003). oncogene 22: 710–721.
gan b, melkoumian zk, wu x, guan kl, guan jl. (2005).
j cell biol 170: 379–389.
et al. (2003). exp cell res 290: 144–154.
kim dh, sarbassov dd, ali sm, king je, latek rr,
erdjument-bromage h et al. (2002). cell 110: 163–175.
kim dh, sarbassov dos d, ali sm, latek rr, guntur kv,
erdjument-bromage h et al. (2003). mol cell 11: 895–904.
kimura n, tokunaga c, dalal s, richardson c, yoshino k,
hara k et al. (2003). genes cells 8: 65–79.
krause u, bertrand l, hue l. (2002). eur j biochem 269:
3751–3759.
kruppa j, clemens mj. (1984). embo j 3: 95–100.
kudchodkar sb, yu y, maguire tg, alwine jc. (2004).
j virol 78: 11030–11039.
gangloff yg, mueller m, dann sg, svoboda p, sticker m,
spetz jf et al. (2004). mol cell biol 24: 9508–9516.
li y, inoki k, guan kl. (2004). mol cell biol 24: 7965–7975.
li y, inoki k, vacrasis p, guan kl. (2003). j biol chem 11: 11.
oncogene
upstream of mtor
mn corradetti and k-l guan
6359
lin l, stringﬁeld tm, shi x, chen y. (2005). biochem j 392:
rosner m, hengstschlager m. (2004). j biol chem 279:
93–102.
48707–48715.
lizcano jm, goransson o, toth r, deak m, morrice na,
roux pp, ballif ba, anjum r, gygi sp, blenis j. (2004). proc
boudeau j et al. (2004). embo j 23: 833–843.
natl acad sci usa 101: 13489–13494.
loewith r, jacinto e, wullschleger s, lorberg a, crespo jl,
sabatini dm, erdjument-bromage h, lui m, tempst p,
bonenfant d et al. (2002). mol cell 10: 457–468.
snyder sh. (1994). cell 78: 35–43.
long x, lin y, ortiz-vega s, yonezawa k, avruch j. (2005a).
sabers cj, martin mm, brunn gj, williams jm, dumont fj,
curr biol 15: 702–713.
wiederrecht g et al. (1995). j biol chem 270: 815–822.
long x, ortiz-vega s, lin y, avruch j. (2005b). j biol chem
saborio jl, pong ss, koch g.
(1974). j mol biol 85:
280: 23433–23436.
195–211.
ma l, chen z, erdjument-bromage h, tempst p, pandolﬁ
sarbassov dd, guertin da, ali sm, sabatini dm. (2005).
pp. (2005a). cell 121: 179–193.
science 307: 1098–1101.
ma l, teruya-feldstein j, behrendt n, chen z, noda t, hino
o et al. (2005b). genes dev 19: 1779–1786.
mahfouz mm, kim s, delauney aj, verma dp. (2006). plant
cell 18: 477–490.
sarbassov d, ali sm, kim dh, guertin da, latek rr,
(2004). curr biol 14:
erdjument-bromage h et al.
1296–1302.
sarbassov d, ali sm, sabatini dm. (2005). curr opin cell
majumder pk, febbo pg, bikoff r, berger r, xue q,
biol 17: 596–603.
mcmahon lm et al. (2004). nat med 10: 594–601.
sarbassov d, sabatini dm. (2005). j biol chem 280: 39505–
majumder pk, sellers wr. (2005). oncogene 24: 7465–7474.
mamane y, petroulakis e, rong l, yoshida k, ler lw,
39509.
saucedo lj, gao x, chiarelli da, li l, pan d, edgar ba.
sonenberg n. (2004). oncogene 23: 3172–3179.
(2003). nat cell biol 5: 566–571.
manning bd. (2004). j cell biol 167: 399–403.
manning bd, logsdon mn, lipovsky ai, abbott d,
(2005). genes dev 19:
kwiatkowski dj, cantley lc.
1773–1778.
martin de, hall mn. (2005). curr opin cell biol 17: 158–166.
mata j, marguerat s, bahler j. (2005). trends biochem sci 30:
506–514.
schmidt ev. (1999). oncogene 18: 2988–2996.
shah oj, wang z, hunter t. (2004). curr biol 14: 1650–1656.
shamji af, nghiem p, schreiber sl. (2003). mol cell 12:
271–280.
shaw rj, bardeesy n, manning bd, lopez l, kosmatka m,
depinho ra et al. (2004). cancer cell 6: 91–99.
shaw rj, lamia ka, vasquez d, koo sh, bardeesy n,
menand b, meyer c, robaglia c. (2004). curr top microbiol
depinho ra et al. (2005). science 310: 1642–1646.
immunol 279: 97–113.
shi y, gera j, hu l, hsu jh, bookstein r, li w et al. (2002).
montagne j, stewart mj, stocker h, hafen e, kozma sc,
cancer res 62: 5027–5034.
thomas g. (1999). science 285: 2126–2129.
shioi t, mcmullen jr, kang pm, douglas ps, obata t,
murakami m, ichisaka t, maeda m, oshiro n, hara k,
franke tf et al. (2002). mol cell biol 22: 2799–2809.
edenhofer f et al. (2004). mol cell biol 24: 6710–6718.
naegele s, morley sj. (2004). j biol chem 279: 46023–46034.
neshat ms, mellinghoff ik, tran c, stiles b, thomas g,
petersen r et al. (2001). proc natl acad sci usa 98:
10314–10319.
nobukuni t, joaquin m, roccio m, dann sg, kim sy,
gulati p et al. (2005). proc natl acad sci usa 102: 14238–
14243.
shioi t, mcmullen jr, tarnavski o, converso k,
sherwood mc, manning wj et al. (2003). circulation 107:
1664–1670.
shoshani t, faerman a, mett i, zelin e, tenne t, gorodin s
et al. (2002). mol cell biol 22: 2283–2293.
smith em, finn sg, tee ar, browne gj, proud cg. (2005).
j biol chem 280: 18717–18727.
sofer a, lei k, johannessen cm, ellisen lw. (2005). mol cell
o’shea c, klupsch k, choi s, bagus b, soria c, shen j et al.
biol 25: 5834–5845.
(2005a). embo j 24: 1211–1221.
o’shea cc. (2005). curr opin genet dev 15: 18–26.
o’shea cc, choi s, mccormick f, stokoe d. (2005b). cell
cycle 4: 883–888.
stocker h, radimerski t, schindelholz b, wittwer f,
(2003). nat cell biol 5:
belawat p, daram p et al.
559–565.
stolovich m, tang h, hornstein e, levy g, cohen r, bae ss
parrott la, templeton dj.
(1999). j biol chem 274:
et al. (2002). mol cell biol 22: 8101–8113.
24731–24736.
tapon n, ito n, dickson bj, treisman je, hariharan ik.
patel j, mcleod le, vries rg, flynn a, wang x, proud cg.
(2001). cell 105: 345–355.
(2002). eur j biochem 269: 3076–3085.
tee ar, anjum r, blenis j. (2003a). j biol chem 278:
perry j, kleckner n. (2003). cell 112: 151–155.
podsypanina k, lee rt, politis c, hennessy i, crane a,
(2001). proc natl acad sci usa 98:
puc j et al.
10320–10325.
ponticelli c. (2004). j nephrol 17: 762–768.
potter cj, huang h, xu t. (2001). cell 105: 357–368.
potter cj, pedraza lg, xu t. (2002). nat cell biol 4: 658–665.
prendergast gc. (2003). cancer cell 4: 244–245.
proud cg. (2004a). dna repair (amsterdam) 3: 927–934.
proud cg.
215–244.
(2004b). curr top microbiol
immunol 279:
rajasekhar vk, holland ec. (2004). oncogene 23: 3248–3264.
rajasekhar vk, viale a, socci nd, wiedmann m, hu x,
holland ec. (2003). mol cell 12: 889–901.
reiling jh, hafen e. (2004). genes dev 18: 2879–2892.
rosner m, freilinger a, hengstschlager m. (2004). amino
acids 27: 119–128.
37288–37296.
tee ar, manning bd, roux pp, cantley lc, blenis j.
(2003b). curr biol 13: 1259–1268.
tee ar, proud cg. (2000). oncogene 19: 3021–3031.
temple md, perrone gg, dawes iw. (2005). trends cell biol
15: 319–326.
thomas gv, tran c, mellinghoff ik, welsbie ds, chan e,
fueger b et al. (2006). nat med 12: 122–127.
tirado om, mateo-lozano s, sanders s, dettin le, notario
v. (2003). cancer res 63: 6290–6298.
um sh, frigerio f, watanabe m, picard f, joaquin m,
sticker m et al. (2004). nature 431: 200–205.
urano j, comiso mj, guo l, aspuria pj, deniskin r,
(2005). mol microbiol 58:
tabancay jr ap et al.
1074–1086.
wang x, huong sm, chiu ml, raab-traub n, huang es.
(2003a). nature 424: 456–461.
oncogene
6360
upstream of mtor
mn corradetti and k-l guan
wang z, malone mh, thomenius mj, zhong f, xu f,
zacharek sj, xiong y, shumway sd. (2005). cancer res 65:
distelhorst cw. (2003b). j biol chem 278: 27053–27058.
11354–11360.
wendel hg, de stanchina e, fridman js, malina a, ray s,
zhang h, stallock jp, ng jc, reinhard c, neufeld tp. (2000).
kogan s et al. (2004). nature 428: 332–337.
genes dev 14: 2712–2724.
woods a, johnstone sr, dickerson k, leiper fc, fryer lg,
zhou g, myers r, li y, chen y, shen x, fenyk-melody j
neumann d et al. (2003). curr biol 13: 2004–2008.
et al. (2001). j clin invest 108: 1167–1174.
oncogene