transcription analysis of arabidopsis membrane
transporters and hormone pathways during
developmental and induced leaf senescence1[w]
eric van der graaff2, rainer schwacke, anja schneider3, marcelo desimone,
ulf-ingo flu¨ gge, and reinhard kunze4*
institute of botany ii, university of cologne, 50931 cologne, germany (e.v.d.g., r.s., a.s., u.-i.f., r.k.);
and center of plant molecular biology, university of tu¨ bingen, 72076 tuebingen, germany (m.d.)
a comparative transcriptome analysis for successive stages of arabidopsis (arabidopsis thaliana) developmental leaf senescence
(ns), darkening-induced senescence of individual leaves attached to the plant (dis), and senescence in dark-incubated detached
leaves (det) revealed many novel senescence-associated genes with distinct expression proﬁles. the three senescence processes
share a high number of regulated genes, although the overall number of regulated genes during dis and det is about 2 times
lower than during ns. consequently, the number of ns-speciﬁc genes is much higher than the number of dis- or det-speciﬁc
genes. the expression proﬁles of transporters (tps), receptor-like kinases, autophagy genes, and hormone pathways were
analyzed in detail. the arabidopsis tps and other integral membrane proteins were systematically reclassiﬁed based on the
transporter classiﬁcation system. coordinate activation or inactivation of several genes is observed in some tp families in all
three or only in individual senescence types, indicating differences in the genetic programs for remobilization of catabolites.
characteristic senescence type-speciﬁc differences were also apparent in the expression proﬁles of (putative) signaling kinases.
for eight hormones, the expression of biosynthesis, metabolism, signaling, and (partially) response genes was investigated. in
most pathways, novel senescence-associated genes were identiﬁed. the expression proﬁles of hormone homeostasis and
signaling genes reveal additional players in the senescence regulatory network.
during its life span, a rosette leaf progresses through
distinct developmental stages. shortly after its initia-
tion as a leaf primordium, the young leaf is a typical
sink organ. subsequently, the leaf undergoes a phase
of rapid expansion, during which transition from sink
to source organ takes place. after reaching its ﬁnal
(mature) size and a period as source organ, the rosette
leaf enters the program of leaf senescence. during
this process nutrients are recycled and transported to
sink tissues, which in arabidopsis (arabidopsis thali-
ana) are developing ﬂowers and seeds (himelblau and
amasino, 2001).
1 this work was supported by grants from the deutsche
the bundesministerium fu¨ r bildung
forschungsgemeinschaft,
und forschung, and the fonds der chemischen industrie.
2 present address: institute of biology iii, university of freiburg,
scha¨nzlestrasse 1, 79104 freiburg, germany.
3 present address: botanical
institute, ludwig-maximilians-
university munich, menzinger str. 67, 80638 munich, germany.
4 present address: institute of biology/applied genetics, free
university berlin, albrecht-thaer-weg 6, 14195 berlin, germany.
* corresponding author; e-mail rkunze@zedat.fu-berlin.de; fax
49–30–838–54345.
the author responsible for distribution of materials integral to the
ﬁndings presented in this article in accordance with the policy
described in the instructions for authors (www.plantphysiol.org) is:
reinhard kunze (rkunze@zedat.fu-berlin.de).
[w] the online version of this article contains web-only data.
article, publication date, and citation information can be found at
www.plantphysiol.org/cgi/doi/10.1104/pp.106.079293.
leaf senescence is a postmitotic senescence program
(for review, see gan, 2003) that occurs in aging, but
also in stressed or detached leaves, and proceeds in a
strictly ordered manner. leaf senescence begins with
the transition from anabolism of carbohydrates and
other biomolecules to catabolism of proteins, nucleic
acids, and lipids, and culminates in cell death. the
onset and progression of leaf senescence is accompa-
nied by changes in expression of a large number of
genes, and activation of new genes in leaves is re-
quired for the onset of senescence (for review, see
noode´n et al., 1997; buchanan-wollaston et al., 2003;
gan, 2003). using various techniques, hundreds of
senescence-associated genes (sags) were identiﬁed in
arabidopsis (e.g. he et al., 2001; hinderhofer and
zentgraf, 2001; chen et al., 2002; buchanan-wollaston
et al., 2003, 2005).
many, but not all, sags respond to induced senes-
cence in a broadly similar fashion as upon natural leaf
senescence or aging. however, different treatments
induce different but overlapping sets of sags (becker
and apel, 1993; weaver et al., 1998). incubation of de-
tached leaves in darkness is highly effective in in-
ducing sags, leaf yellowing, and chlorophyll loss
(weaver and amasino, 2001), and it was suggested
that the respective sags might be a superset of those
induced by aging (weaver et al., 1998). the evaluation
of the overlap between artiﬁcially and aging-induced
sags therefore gives an idea which sags are senes-
cence speciﬁc or possibly more generally induced by
stress conditions.
776
plant physiology, june 2006, vol. 141, pp. 776–792, www.plantphysiol.org ó 2006 american society of plant biologists
downloaded from 
www.plantphysiol.org
 on july 2, 2014 - published by 
www.plant.org
copyright © 2006 american society of plant biologists. all rights reserved.
in this study, the genome-wide changes in gene
expression during leaf senescence were investigated
employing the agilent arabidopsis version 2 chips
with more than 80% genome coverage. to recognize
changes in expression that are speciﬁc for develop-
mental leaf senescence (ns) or aging, the respective
expression proﬁles were compared to that of individ-
ually shaded leaves still attached to the plant (dis) and
detached dark-incubated leaves (det). the emphasis
of this study was to identify (putative) transporters
(tps), signaling kinases, and hormone pathway genes
that are regulated during senescence. many novel
sags in various protein categories were identiﬁed.
we discuss possible functions for several of these
proteins during senescence and the involvement of
hormone pathways in developmental and induced
senescence.
results and discussion
experimental setup
it was reported that
to study the progression of ns, leaves were harves-
ted at six developmental stages from a sink leaf stage
(4-week-old plants) to a late senescent stage (approx-
imately 75% yellowing of the leaf surface; $80%
chlorophyll loss; table i). from each senescence stage,
rna was prepared, labeled, and hybridized to agilent
arabidopsis 2 microarrays with 21,500 probes that
represent more than 80% of arabidopsis genes. in a
recent study,
the sensitivity
of these microarrays is comparable with affymetrix
ath1 and catma arrays (allemeersch et al., 2005).
ns expression proﬁles were compared with proﬁles
induced by dis and by det. these treatments were
established to induce senescence (becker and apel,
1993; oh et al., 1996; park et al., 1998; weaver and
amasino, 2001). as the expression proﬁles in senes-
cing leaves are inﬂuenced both by the age (position)
of the rosette leaf and plant age (zentgraf et al.,
2004), the use of whole plants as a source for rna
extraction could cause dilution, distortion, or blurring
of senescence-associated expression proﬁles. therefore,
in this study, only the ﬁfth and sixth rosette leaves
were used.
in all samples, chlorophyll a and b contents were
determined (supplemental fig. 1b), allowing correla-
arabidopsis natural and induced senescence transcriptome
tion of the senescence stages of the ns, det, and dis
experiments with each other and with experiments
reported by others (weaver et al., 1998; weaver and
amasino, 2001). in dis, similar chlorophyll degrada-
tion levels as during ns in the leaves were observed
between 2 and 9 d after shading. after detaching of
leaves, chlorophyll degradation occurs more rapidly,
reaching comparably low levels already after approx-
imately 6 d. the time scales in figures 4 to 7 and sup-
plemental figures 2 to 10 were superimposed based on
approximately equal chlorophyll contents.
expression proﬁles during leaf senescence
in this study, structural, functional, and classiﬁca-
tion attributes were assigned to approximately 10,000
arabidopsis genes (supplemental table i) and linked
to the 21,500 genes represented on the microarrays. in
table ii, the complete list of all ﬁgures and tables used
for the discussion of individual protein families is
given. the expression data for all 21,500 genes are
summarized in supplemental table ii. supplemental
table iii summarizes the data for all genes signiﬁ-
cantly regulated in both biological replicates (see
‘‘materials and methods’’), including the classiﬁcation
tags.
the regulated genes were sorted into seven clusters
by k-means clustering (supplemental fig. 1a; sup-
plemental table iii). most of the 3,513 genes regulated
during the ns experiment exhibit a gradual up-
regulation (38%; cluster 1) or down-regulation (33%;
cluster 7). other genes are transiently up-regulated
(17%; clusters 2–4) or down-regulated (11%; clusters 5
and 6). in the dis and det experiments, only 1,833
and 2,158 regulated genes were observed, and of these
smaller fractions than during ns exhibit a gradual
regulation (clusters 1 and 7). this difference presum-
ably reﬂects that, during the 3 to 4 weeks of ns pro-
gression, developmentally programmed physiological
processes are activated that remain inactive during the
only 6- to 9-d det and dis senescence reactions. on
the other hand, during det and dis, after only 2 d
more genes show an intense response than at the
5-week-old ns stage, which is most obvious for the
genes in dis and det clusters 3 to 5. the determination
of expression levels at multiple time points allowed
the recognition of sags with early and transient
table i. developmental stages of ﬁfth and sixth rosette leaves harvested for natural leaf senescence (ns)
das, days after sowing; w, week; y, percentage of yellow surface.
stage
4w
5w
6w
25y
50y
75y
das
28
35
42
48–50
50–53
52–56
description
rapid expansion, sink leaf
fully expanded, sink-to-source transition
fully expanded, source leaf
early senescence, approximately 25% yellow surface
mid-senescence, approximately 50% yellow surface
late senescence, approximately 75% yellow surface
adevelopmental stages according to boyes et al. (2001).
principle growtha
rosette growth
flower production
flower production
flower production
flower production
silique ripening
plant physiol. vol. 141, 2006
 on july 2, 2014 - published by 
www.plant.org
downloaded from 
www.plantphysiol.org
copyright © 2006 american society of plant biologists. all rights reserved.
stagea
3.50–3.70
6.00–6.10
6.10–6.30
6.30–6.50
6.50–6.90
6.90–8.00
777
van der graaff et al.
table ii. list of ﬁgures and tables
supp., supplemental.
name
description
table i
description of natural senescence leaf
table ii
table iii
table iv
figure 1
material
this table
expression proﬁles of sags
plant speciﬁcity of senescence-regulated
genes
a, sets of genes regulated during ns, dis,
and det; b, mips functional categories
figure 2
tp families with biased frequencies of
up- or down-regulated genes
figure 3
rlk families with biased frequencies of
up- or down-regulated genes
figure 4
figure 5
expression proﬁles of selected atg genes
expression proﬁles of selected ck-related
figure 6
expression proﬁles of selected ja-related
genes
genes
figure 7
expression proﬁles of selected ga- and
br-related genes
supp. table i
10,127 genes with structural, functional,
classiﬁcation, and other tags
supp. table ii
supp. table iii
relative expression values of 21,500 genes
on the agilent arabidopsis 2 microarray
4,109 genes regulated during ns, dis, or
det with tags
supp. table iv 1,063 putative tps
supp. table v
supp. table vi
supp. table vii relative expression values of regulated
relative expression values of regulated tps
986 putative kinases and rlks
expression peaks, or slow and late up-regulation, that
could be overlooked in single senescence stage exper-
iments.
developmental and induced senescence share many
commonly regulated genes
the expression proﬁles of 22 reported sags and of a
chlorophyll a/b binding protein (cab) were analyzed
(table iii). the cab gene is strongly and continuously
down-regulated during ns, dis, and det. applying
stringent selection criteria (see ‘‘materials and methods’’),
all except two sags (sag101 and yls3) are up-
regulated. the 17 sags that show up-regulation during
ns are also up-regulated in det and/or dis. these
data indicate that our results are consistent and com-
parable with those of other studies. three genes, sen1,
din11, and sag102, are only in det and/or dis
signiﬁcantly up-regulated.
the venn diagrams in figure 1a illustrate the pro-
portions of common and condition-speciﬁc regulated
genes. during ns, the up-regulated genes outnumber
the down-regulated genes, whereas in dis and det
the fractions are similar or opposite. of the 1,232 genes
regulated in all three conditions, more genes are down-
regulated (726 genes 5 59%) than up-regulated (506
genes 5 41%). this set of commonly regulated genes
kinases and rlks
table iii. temporal expression of sags
supp. table viii 2,996 ps genes and 2,391 genes found in
ao on the microarray
supp. table ix atg genes
ck-related genes
supp. table x
ja-related genes
supp. table xi
supp. table xii
sa-related genes
supp. table xiii et-related genes
supp. table xiv auxin-related genes
supp. table xv ga-related genes
supp. table xvi br-related genes
supp. table xvii aba-related genes
supp. figure 1
k-means clustering of genes regulated during
supp. figure 2
expression proﬁles of senescence-associated
senescence
atg genes
supp. figure 3
expression proﬁles of senescence-associated
ja-related genes
supp. figure 4
expression proﬁles of senescence-associated
sa-related genes
supp. figure 5
expression proﬁles of senescence-associated
sa-responsive genes
supp. figure 6
expression proﬁles of senescence-associated
et-related genes
supp. figure 7
expression proﬁles of senescence-associated
ja- and et-responsive genes
supp. figure 8
expression proﬁles of senescence-associated
auxin-related genes
supp. figure 9
expression proﬁles of senescence-associated
supp. figure 10 expression proﬁles of senescence-associated
auxin-signaling genes
aba-related genes
gene id
name
ns
clustera
dis
clustera
det
clustera
sag101
at5g14930
sen1
at5g66170
at3g63210
sag102
at1g62300 wrky6
sag13
at2g29350
sag26
at1g09500
yls4, atasp3
at5g11520
yls6
at2g45570
at5g13170
sag29
yls7
at5g51640
sag24
at1g66580
yls1
at3g60130
sag12
at5g45890
at3g10980
sag20
din10
at5g20250
sag21
at4g02380
erd1
at5g51070
sag103
at1g10140
at4g30270
sen4
yls2
at3g51430
yls3
at2g44290
din11
at3g49620
at1g29920
cab
anumbers refer to the clusters shown in supplemental figure 1.
clusters 1 to 4 in ns and 1 to 3 in dis and det represent upregulated
genes, and clusters 5 to 7 in ns and 4 to 7 in dis and det represent
down-regulated genes.
indicates no signiﬁcant expression or
regulation.
‘‘0’’
778
plant physiol. vol. 141, 2006
downloaded from 
www.plantphysiol.org
 on july 2, 2014 - published by 
www.plant.org
copyright © 2006 american society of plant biologists. all rights reserved.
arabidopsis natural and induced senescence transcriptome
tion of the products, during which supposedly tps are
critically involved. however, until recently only few
senescence-associated tps were reported (himelblau
and amasino, 2001; quirino et al., 2001), and, only
after the advent of large-scale expression proﬁling,
more (putative) arabidopsis tps that are up-regulated
during senescence were identiﬁed (buchanan-wollaston
et al., 2003, 2005; guo et al., 2004; lin and wu, 2004).
the arabidopsis membrane proteins were system-
atically reclassiﬁed (see ‘‘materials and methods’’),
resulting in 2,234 predicted arabidopsis proteins with
at least three transmembrane (tm) spans (supplemen-
tal table i, column f). a categorization by the trans-
porter classiﬁcation system (tc; busch and saier,
2004) returned 994 proteins assigned to 84 tp families,
including 32 proteins with less than three tm spans. in
addition, 69 putative tps are listed that could not be
assigned to a tc family (supplemental table iv).
of the 963 putative tp genes on the array, during ns
153 are up-regulated (173 during ns or dis or det)
and 60 are down-regulated (72 during ns or dis or
det; supplemental table v). remarkably, the propor-
tion of up-regulated tps is about 1.5 times higher than
that of all genes in the three senescence experiments,
whereas the overall proportion of down-regulated tps
is similar to that of all genes (fig. 2).
in 27 of the 80 tc families, no signiﬁcant regulation
of genes is observed in any of the three senescence
experiments, and 26 families are either too small to
calculate a relative frequency or exhibit regulation
of only a single gene in one experiment. in 21 of
the remaining 27 families, a tendency toward up-
regulation during senescence is apparent (fig. 2). the
only predominantly down-regulated families are the
major intrinsic proteins, divalent anion:na1 sym-
porters, and auxin efﬂux carriers. the preponderance
of up-regulated tps corresponds well with the sub-
strates known to be transported from senescent leaves
to sink organs (amino acids, inorganic phosphorus, sug-
ars, purines, pyrimidines, and metal ions; himelblau
and amasino, 2001; soudry et al., 2005). the up-
regulation for amino acid and oligopeptide tps corre-
lates with the high amount of protein degradation
taking place during senescence and the subsequent
need to export the breakdown products to the sink
organs (ho¨ rtensteiner and feller, 2002). many tps are
commonly regulated in the three types of senescence
experiments, indicating that the nutrient ﬂuxes might
be largely similar (fig. 2; supplemental table v).
however, during ns a higher fraction of amino acid
and oligopeptide tps are up-regulated. this probably
reﬂects the slower and developmentally controlled
progression of the senescence process during aging
compared to det and dis, presumably enabling a
more efﬁcient and thorough nutrient mobilization
during ns.
subcellular localization predictions for the tps were
retrieved from the aramemnon database and are
indicated in supplemental tables iv and v. the genes
encoding tps with predicted localization in the
figure 1. a, venn diagrams showing the numbers of signiﬁcantly up-
regulated and down-regulated genes that are unique or commonly
regulated during ns, dis, and det. b, frequency of regulated genes
that are assigned to a functional protein category according to the
matdb. the number of genes on the array assigned to a category is
shown in parentheses beside the category designation. positive and
negative values on the scale indicate the fraction of up- and down-
regulated genes, respectively.
includes more than 50% of the genes regulated in
dis and det, indicating that the developmental and
induced senescence programs share many common
pathways.
categories of sags
for an overview, the frequency of regulated genes/
proteins assigned to major protein functional categories
in the munich information center for protein sequences
(mips) arabidopsis database (matdb; schoof et al.,
2004) was determined. in most categories, similar pro-
portions of genes are regulated in dis and det,
whereas in ns slightly more genes are up-regulated.
however, in all three conditions, a bias toward down-
regulation is observed for the ‘‘transposable element,’’
‘‘protein synthesis,’’ and ‘‘energy’’ categories (fig. 1b;
supplemental table ii). in the following sections,
selected protein classes are discussed in more detail.
tps
a key role of senescence in plant tissues is the or-
dered degradation of macromolecules and mobiliza-
plant physiol. vol. 141, 2006
downloaded from 
www.plantphysiol.org
copyright © 2006 american society of plant biologists. all rights reserved.
 on july 2, 2014 - published by 
www.plant.org
779
van der graaff et al.
figure 2. tp families with biased frequencies of
signiﬁcantly up- or down-regulated genes during
senescence. behind the tp family designation as
deﬁned in the tc system, the tc family code (in
brackets) and the number of genes on the array
assigned to this family (in parentheses) are indi-
cated. positive and negative values on the x axis
indicate the fraction of up- and down-regulated
genes, respectively.
plasma membrane (secretory pathway) exhibit a pref-
erential up-regulation during ns and det. similar to
the total set of regulated genes, the genes encoding
(putative) plastidic localized tps display a preferential
down-regulation during all three senescence experi-
ments. this might reﬂect the decline in photoassimi-
late export
from plastids during the progression
of senescence. only 14 putative tps with predicted
plastidic localization are up-regulated during ns
(supplemental table v). it is conceivable that these
proteins are speciﬁcally involved in recycling of deg-
radation products and energy allocation in the senesc-
ing plastids. the up-regulation of
the putative
aminophospholipid translocase atala3 later in senes-
cence might indicate a role in exporting thylakoid mem-
brane degradation products.
in a recent study, 74 putative tps up-regulated
during developmental senescence were identiﬁed
(buchanan-wollaston et al., 2005). four of these are
not represented on the microarrays used here, and ﬁve
are not tm proteins according to the aramemnon
database. forty-eight of the remaining genes also show
up in the ns experiment (supplemental table v, col-
umn g). the remaining 17 genes were not rated as up-
regulated in our experiment because they did not pass
the signiﬁcance criteria.
kinases and receptor-like kinases
in arabidopsis, nearly 1,000 genes are estimated to
encode proteins belonging to the eukaryotic protein
kinase superfamily. more than 60% of these are receptor-
like kinases (rlks) whose kinase domains belong to
the same family as the mammalian interleukin receptor-
associated kinases and the drosophila melanogaster
pelle proteins (shiu and bleecker, 2001).
the agilent chip carries probes for 376 kinase and
610 rlk genes that fall into 62 (sub)families (supple-
mental table vi). more than 470 rlk/pelle proteins
are predicted by the aramemnon database to con-
tain a single a-helical tm domain.
overall, 55 (9) kinase and 91 (42) rlk genes are up-
regulated (down-regulated) during ns or dis or det
(supplemental table vii). thus, the same proportion
(15%) of kinases and rlks are up-regulated, whereas
the proportion of down-regulated kinases is lower.
thirteen of the 61 kinase and rlk families are not
regulated during senescence, and 32 families are either
too small to calculate a relative frequency or exhibit
regulation of only a single gene in one experiment.
from 27 kinase and rlk families with more conspic-
uous patterns, 13 are shown in figure 3. in contrast to
the tp genes, the differences in expression patterns
between ns, dis, and det are striking in some sub-
families. some genes are up-regulated in all three senes-
cence types; however, more frequently up-regulation
is observed in ns, but not in dis and det. for example,
11 members of the duf26 subfamily are rapidly up-
regulated during the 5-week and 6-week ns stages, but
not in dis and det. atcrk10 is even down-regulated
during dis and det (supplemental table vii). atcrk7
and atcrk37 are salicylic acid (sa) responsive
780
downloaded from 
www.plantphysiol.org
copyright © 2006 american society of plant biologists. all rights reserved.
 on july 2, 2014 - published by 
www.plant.org
plant physiol. vol. 141, 2006
arabidopsis natural and induced senescence transcriptome
senescence is only slightly higher than the frequency
of regulated ao genes (table iv).
of the 1,931 tm genes on the array, comprising tps
and other proteins with more than three tm spans
(supplemental table i, column f), 10% are in the
ps and 15% in the ao groups. the frequency of
senescence-up-regulated tm genes in the ao group is
approximately 3 times higher than that of the up- or
down-regulated ps tm genes and the down-regulated
tm genes common to all organisms, suggesting that
the majority of tp functions involved in leaf senes-
cence are common to all taxa and only few senescence-
speciﬁc activities are required.
differences become apparent in the two other pro-
tein categories. of the 1,985 putative transcription
factors (tfs) on the array, 32% are in the ps and only
1.6% in the ao groups. during developmental senes-
cence, 133 (21%) of all ps tfs are either up- or down-
regulated, whereas only four tfs in the ao group
(12.5% of all ao tfs) are regulated. even when taking
into account that arabidopsis has 2 to 3 times more
tfs than caenorhabditis elegans or d. melanogaster and
only 8% to 23% of arabidopsis tfs show similarity to
tfs in non-plant eukaryotes (arabidopsis genome
initiative, 2000), there remains a disparity that sug-
gests that ps tfs are key players in the regulatory
pathways leading to and coordinating leaf senescence.
an opposite bias is observed in the kinase and rlk
categories. apparently, there exist almost no strictly ps
(receptor-like) kinases in arabidopsis. all these pro-
teins have relatives in other taxa, 65% of them even in
ao (table iv).
autophagy genes and senescence
during senescence, different pathways contribute to
degradation of proteins and other macromolecules,
one of them being autophagy (atg). in arabidopsis,
some atg genes are encoded by small gene families,
e.g. there are nine orthologs of the yeast atg8 and ﬁve
orthologs of the atg18 protein. knockout or rnai
mutants of atatg4a/b, atatg5, atatg7, atatg9, and
atatg18a display accelerated senescence and hyper-
sensitivity to nutrient starvation (doelling et al., 2002;
hanaoka et al., 2002; yoshimoto et al., 2004; thompson
et al., 2005; xiong et al., 2005), indicating that autophagy
is not essential for the senescence program but plays an
important role in nutrient remobilization. consistently,
in arabidopsis suspension-cultured cells, several atg
genes are up-regulated at the onset of carbon starvation
(contento et al., 2004; rose et al., 2006).
remarkably, nineteen of the 21 arabidopsis atg
genes (supplemental table ix) on the microarray are
transcriptionally activated (supplemental fig. 2). it ap-
pears most atg genes are coordinately up-regulated
at a stage in developmental senescence when chloro-
phyll degradation starts to get visible, i.e. between the
6-week and 25%-bleaching stages. figure 4 shows
the expression proﬁles of the most dramatically up-
regulated atg genes, 7, 8a, 8e, and 9. the prolonged
figure 3. rlk families with biased frequencies of signiﬁcantly up- or
down-regulated genes during senescence. behind the kinase family
designations, the number of genes on the array assigned to this family is
indicated in parentheses. positive and negative values on the x axis
indicate the fraction of up- and down-regulated genes, respectively.
(supplemental fig. 5, g and w; buchanan-wollaston
et al., 2005), and several of these crks (for ca21-
dependent protein kinase-related kinases) were shown
tobeinvolvedinpathogendefenseresponsesandhyper-
sensitive response-like cell death (chen et al., 2003,
2004). leu-rich repeat-ia is another rlk subfamily
with several ns up-regulated genes. here, four of the
ﬁve genes are also up-regulated during det, but not
during dis. this group includes atsirk, which also is
sa induced (supplemental fig. 5l; buchanan-wollaston
et al., 2005). the senescence-associated expression of
atsirk and a close relative in bean, sark , was noted
before (hajouj et al., 2000; robatzek and somssich, 2002).
plant-speciﬁc genes and senescence
leaf senescence is a unique plant-speciﬁc (ps)
developmental program. we therefore examined a
possible correlation between senescence-associated
expression and ps genes. in arabidopsis, 3,848 genes
were identiﬁed that encode ps proteins and 2,436
genes with relatives in all other organisms (ao;
gutierrez et al., 2004a, 2004b). of the 21,500 genes on
the array, 2,996 are ps, whereas 2,391 have relatives in
ao (supplemental table viii). relative to all genes on
the array, the frequency of ps genes regulated during
plant physiol. vol. 141, 2006
downloaded from 
www.plantphysiol.org
copyright © 2006 american society of plant biologists. all rights reserved.
 on july 2, 2014 - published by 
www.plant.org
781
van der graaff et al.
table iv. plant speciﬁcity of sags
up, up-regulated; down, down-regulated.
category
psa
total
ps senb
up
ps nsc
up
ps sen
down
ps ns
down
aod
total
ao sen
up
ao ns
up
ao sen
down
ao ns
down
22/1.1%
1/0.1%
18/0.9%
48/2.4%
all genese
tmf
tfg
kh
rlki
aps, arabidopsis genes with similar protein sequences found only in other plants.
2,996/14% 392/1.8% 326/1.5% 316/1.5% 285/1.3% 2,391/11% 318/1.5% 273/1.3% 235/1.1% 188/0.9%
22/1.1%
191/10%
21/1.1%
2/0.1%
638/32% 104/5.2% 91/4.6%
4/1.1%
23/3.8%
297/15%
32/1.6%
252/67%
386/63%
cns, genes that are regulated during ns.
det.
and eukaryotes.
percentages relate to the total 21,500 genes on the microarray.
tm genes in the respective category. percentages relate to the 1,931 tm genes on the microarray.
genes in the respective category. percentages relate to the 1,985 tf genes on the microarray.
in the respective category. percentages relate to the 376 k genes on the microarray.
respective category. percentages relate to the 610 rlk genes on the microarray.
bsen, genes that are regulated during ns, dis, or
dao, arabidopsis genes with similar protein sequences in bacteria, archae, cyanobacteria,
eall genes, all genes on the agilent arabidopsis 2 microarray. given is the number of genes in the respective category.
ftm, tps and other membrane proteins with $3 tm spans. given is the number of
gtf, putative tfs. given is the number of tf
hk, putative kinases. given is the number of k genes
irlk, putative rlks. given is the number of rlk genes in the
26/1.3%
2/0.1%
7/1.9%
31/5.1%
62/3.2%
2/0.1%
46/12%
65/11%
54/2.8%
2/0.1%
42/11%
63/10%
17/0.9%
42/2.1%
observation time of induced and developmental senes-
cence progression enabled the recognition of senescence-
associated expression patterns of several atg genes
that had not been recognized in other studies
(buchanan-wollaston et al., 2005; xiong et al., 2005).
it has been proposed that the arabidopsis atg system
is ubiquitously present and not restricted to a certain
developmental phase or nutritional state (for review,
see thompson et al., 2005). consistent with this
assumption is the signiﬁcant background expression
level of many atg genes in 4-week-old plants (e.g.
atatg4b, 8c–f, 8i, and 18g; supplemental table ix). on
the other hand, the massive up-regulation of many
atg genes during all three senescence conditions
suggests that autophagy is important for the efﬁcient
remobilization and recycling of nutrients.
hormones
cytokinin
cytokinins (cks) regulate cell division and various
metabolic and developmental processes, including se-
nescence. ck has a regulatory function early in senes-
cence as ck levels are reduced in senescing leaves,
whereas the exogenous application or endogenous
overexpression of cks delays senescence (smart et al.,
1991; gan and amasino, 1995).
for this study, 137 genes associated with various
aspects of ck homeostasis were compiled (supple-
mental table x). the eight (putative) arabidopsis ade-
nylate isopentenyltransferase enzymes and two ck
trans-hydroxylases that are possibly involved in ck
biosynthesis are very weakly expressed in the three
figure 4. autophagy. the expression proﬁles of
four senescence-associated atg genes are shown.
additional atg gene expression proﬁles are
shown in supplemental figure 2. the averages of
the normalized signal values (see ‘‘materials and
methods’’) were plotted against the sampling time
points. the time scale of the x axis is not linear
and different for the ns, dis, and det senescence
experiments. for the developmental senescence
(ns) curve,
the signal ratio between the last
sampling time point (75y for 75% yellow surface;
see table i) and the 4-week-old reference sample
(4w/0 d) is indicated.
782
downloaded from 
www.plantphysiol.org
 on july 2, 2014 - published by 
www.plant.org
copyright © 2006 american society of plant biologists. all rights reserved.
plant physiol. vol. 141, 2006
senescence experiments
ground’’), and none is up-regulated.
(‘‘not well above back-
for the ck-degrading ck oxidase/dehydrogenases
(ckx; schmu¨ lling et al., 2003) and the ck-inactivating
n- and o-glucosylases, the situation is different. of the
six ckx genes on the array, only atckx5 is expressed
at a high conﬁdence level and increases weakly (2.1- to
2.9-fold) but continuously during ns, dis, and det.
for atckx2 and atckx4, similar patterns at lower
levels are apparent. atckx6 appears to be down-
regulated. the role of ckx proteins in senescence is
as yet unclear, which is illustrated by the observation
that, unexpectedly, overexpression of ckx genes may
result in retardation of leaf senescence (werner et al.,
2003). four of the ﬁve active glycosyltransferases from
arabidopsis (hou et al., 2004) are weakly expressed and
barely regulated. however, the o-glycosyltransferase
atugt85a1 shows a remarkable activation in all three
senescence conditions (fig. 5a). it is thus conceivable
that this protein is involved in senescence-speciﬁc in-
activation of cks by conjugation.
ck levels could also be reduced during senescence
by translocation in the vascular system. two mem-
bers of the purine tp family, atpup1 and atpup2,
can mediate ck uptake in yeast and thus are likely
candidates for ck tps (bu¨ rkle et al., 2003). atpup1
and three other family members are up-regulated
(fig. 5, b and c; supplemental table x) and none of
the remaining atpups is down-regulated (atpup2 is
not represented on the array), consistent with a role of
purine permeases in exporting cks during senes-
cence.
the arabidopsis ck-signaling pathway consists of
ck perception by his protein kinases (ahks) and ac-
tivation of phosphorelay carriers, of b-type and even-
tually of a-type nuclear response regulators (arrs),
which control the primary ck-responsive genes by a
negative feedback mechanism (for review, see hwang
et al., 2002). atahk3 is the only ck receptor that is
detectably expressed, but it is not (or only very weakly:
2.0- to 2.6-fold) up-regulated. of two phosphorelay me-
diators and 11 b-type arrs on the array, only atarr1
seems to be weakly (2.6- to 3.4-fold) up-regulated. sev-
eral a-type arrs are rapidly induced by ck (rashotte
et al., 2003; brenner et al., 2005; kiba et al., 2005). con-
sistent with a depletion of ck during senescence pro-
gression, four of those are down-regulated in ns, dis,
and det (fig. 5, d–g). down-regulation of these genes
also was observed by buchanan-wollaston et al. (2005).
a remarkable exception is atarr16, which is strongly
up-regulated upon ck treatment (d’agostino et al.,
2000; rashotte et al., 2003; kiba et al., 2005). this gene is
also up-regulated during ns and dis (but not det; fig.
5h), suggesting a special function in ck signaling that
deviates from the other a-type arrs.
recently 71 up-regulated and 11 down-regulated
immediate ck-response genes of arabidopsis were
identiﬁed (brenner et al., 2005). from a simplistic
viewpoint, one would expect that these genes are not
regulated or down-regulated during senescence, if the
arabidopsis natural and induced senescence transcriptome
ck level decreases. indeed, 80% of the 69 ck-response
genes on the array are not regulated (43 genes) or
down-regulated (12 genes) during senescence, whereas
the remaining 14 genes are up-regulated (supple-
mental table x). this suggests that one-ﬁfth of the
immediate ck-response genes are under positive con-
trol of other regulators during senescence.
jasmonic acid
jasmonic acid (ja) is critically involved in senes-
cence (for review, see he and gan, 2003). ja applica-
tion induces premature senescence and its level
increases in senescing leaves (he et al., 2002). eleven
of 19 ja-biosynthesis and six of 11 ja-signaling or
-response genes are up- or down-regulated, and some
exhibit strikingly different regulation in ns, dis, and
det (supplemental table xi; supplemental fig. 3,
a–k). eight ja-biosynthesis genes are speciﬁcally and
transiently up-regulated in ns. these include the
highly expressed lipoxygenase atlox2 (supplemen-
tal fig. 3c), allene oxide synthase ataos1 (supple-
mental fig. 3f), and 12-oxophytodienoate reductase
atopr3 (fig. 6a; supplemental fig. 3b) that catalyze
sequential reactions in the ja-biosynthesis pathway.
their coordinate expression during ns, but not dis or
det, suggests that this pathway is in leaves speciﬁ-
cally activated by developmental stimuli. atopr3 is
the isoenzyme also predominantly responsible for ja
biosynthesis during pollen development, and,
like
ataos1, it is essential for male gametophyte devel-
opment and anther elongation. atopr1 and atopr2
are also up-regulated during senescence (supplemen-
tal fig. 3, a and h), but the roles of these less efﬁcient
isoenzymes are not clear. only one gene, the unchar-
acterized putative allene oxide cyclase family protein
ataoc4 (supplemental fig. 3i),
is weakly down-
regulated. in striking contrast, two other genes, atadox1
encoding a fatty acid a-dioxygenase (supplemental
fig. 3j) and atlox1 (fig. 6b; supplemental fig. 3k),
are up-regulated to very high levels in detached leaves
but not in ns and dis, indicating that these genes
are predominantly responding to wounding. taken
together, the expression proﬁles indicate that, during
developmental senescence and upon wounding, dif-
ferent isozymes are active in the ja synthesis pathway
and that in dark-induced senescence ja possibly does
not play major role.
several genes that are supposedly involved in ja
signaling or response are up- or down-regulated dur-
ing senescence (supplemental fig. 3, l–q). the ribo-
nuclease 1 gene atrns1 is strongly up-regulated in
later stages during ns, but not in dis and det (fig.
6c; supplemental fig. 3l). atrns1 also is very rapidly
and transiently induced upon wounding but declines
to almost noninduced level within 48 h (lebrasseur
et al., 2002), explaining that it is not detected in the
det experiment. the late expression peak of rns1
would be consistent with a participation in nucleic acid
degradation late in senescence. the only ja-signaling
plant physiol. vol. 141, 2006
downloaded from 
www.plantphysiol.org
copyright © 2006 american society of plant biologists. all rights reserved.
 on july 2, 2014 - published by 
www.plant.org
783
van der graaff et al.
figure 5. cytokinin. the expression proﬁles of six
senescence-associated ck genes are shown. the
data were processed as described for figure 4.
gene that is strictly down-regulated in all senescence
conditions is atcos1 (fig. 6d; supplemental fig. 3q).
it encodes lumazine synthase, which catalyzes the
penultimate step in riboﬂavin synthesis. it is sugges-
ted that atcos1 acts in the riboﬂavin pathway as a
suppressor of certain ja responses, including senes-
cence (attenuated by the scf/coi1 complex; xiao
et al., 2004). the strong down-regulation of atcos1
during senescence corroborates this model.
salicylic acid
salicylic acid (sa) plays a key role as mediator of
plant stress responses, including disease and systemic
acquired resistance. recently, it was reported that the
sa-signaling pathway is also active in the control
of gene expression during developmental senescence
(morris et al., 2000). a transcriptome analysis in senes-
cing arabidopsis leaves from wild-type plants and
784
downloaded from 
www.plantphysiol.org
copyright © 2006 american society of plant biologists. all rights reserved.
 on july 2, 2014 - published by 
www.plant.org
plant physiol. vol. 141, 2006
arabidopsis natural and induced senescence transcriptome
figure 6. ja. the expression proﬁles of
four
senescence-associated ja genes are shown. ad-
ditional ja gene expression proﬁles are shown in
supplemental figure 3. the data were processed
as described for figure 4.
senescence-enhanced and sa-dependent genes identi-
ﬁed by buchanan-wollaston et al. (2005), reveal an
interesting trend. twenty-six genes are up-regulated
(supplemental figs. 5 and 10a), none is down-
regulated, and all except one are genes identiﬁed in
the nahg mutant. it is somewhat surprising that of the
other 14 sa-responsive genes reported in the liter-
ature, only one (ataf2; supplemental fig. 5p) is
up-regulated during senescence. remarkably,
the
majority of the senescence-associated sa-responsive
genes are only up-regulated during ns, but not (or
only weakly) during dis or det, resembling the ex-
pression proﬁles of the sa-biosynthesis and -signaling
genes mentioned above. in summary, these data pro-
vide additional evidence for sa as a modulator of gene
expression in naturally senescing leaves.
ethylene
the plant hormone ethylene (et) is well known as
an accelerator of senescence. the importance of et
signaling during senescence is illuminated by a de-
layed senescence phenotype of et-insensitive mutants
like ein2 in arabidopsis (oh et al., 1997). however, et
is not essential for the onset and progression of senes-
cence (grbic and bleecker, 1995; jing et al., 2002).
of 69 genes (proposed to be) involved in et bio-
synthesis or signaling (supplemental table xiii), 18
are up- or down-regulated (supplemental fig. 6). the
1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid (acc) synthases
sa-deﬁcient nahg mutants revealed that many sags
are dependent on the sa-signaling pathway (buchanan-
wollaston et al., 2005).
four of six genes that are (possibly) involved in sa
biosynthesis are regulated during ns (supplemental
fig. 4, a–d; supplemental table xii). among them is
the gene encoding isochorismate synthase (atics1), a
central enzyme in the pathway. it is conspicuous that
this gene is only induced during ns, but not after
shading or detachment. in contrast, the ics1 homolog
at1g18870 is also induced by shading, but like ics1
not after detachment of leaves. the two phe ammonia-
lyase genes are only weakly regulated. eight of 12 sa-
signaling genes are regulated during ns, and also in
this group of genes no or less regulation during dis
and det is observed (supplemental fig. 4, e–l). dif-
ferential up-regulation is most prominent for ateds4,
which encodes an orphan mate-related efﬂux carrier.
ateds4 is induced by sa, uv light, and after pathogen
infection, depending on the two other sa-signaling
proteins (ateds1 and atpad4; nawrath et al., 2002).
these also are up-regulated in ns, but not in dis and
det (supplemental fig. 4, h and i). ateds1 and
atpad4 interact with each other, and both genes
are transducers of redox signals and important acti-
vators of sa signaling (for review, see wiermer et al.,
2005). only one sa-signaling gene, atagd2, is down-
regulated during senescence.
the expression proﬁles of 44 sa-responsive genes
the 32
(supplemental table xii),
including 30 of
plant physiol. vol. 141, 2006
downloaded from 
www.plantphysiol.org
copyright © 2006 american society of plant biologists. all rights reserved.
 on july 2, 2014 - published by 
www.plant.org
785
van der graaff et al.
(atacs) catalyze the rate-limiting step in the et-
biosynthesis pathway. arabidopsis encodes nine acs
proteins, of which eight form functional homodimers,
that underly a complex spatial and temporal regula-
tion (tsuchisaka and theologis, 2004). only three of the
functional acc synthases (atacs2, atacs5, and
atacs6) are signiﬁcantly expressed and up-regulated
during ns (supplemental fig. 6, a–c). in the sub-
sequent step, acc is converted to et by the acc
oxidase (ateat1), which is also up-regulated (supple-
mental fig. 6d). in addition, a nitrilase (atnit4) that is
thought to play a role in cyanide detoxiﬁcation during
et biosynthesis (piotrowski et al., 2001) is up-regulated
(supplemental fig. 6e). possibly, this set of proteins is
responsible for an increase in et production in sen-
escing leaves.
et signal transduction supposedly follows a ‘‘lin-
ear’’ pathway, with membrane-bound receptors at the
beginning, tfs at the end of the chain, and multiple
positive and negative regulators in between. the ﬁve
et receptors or the next downstream protein, atctr1,
are not regulated in ns, dis, or det, but several other
components of et signal transduction are. the tp-like
atran1 protein, which might be required to form
functional et receptors (woeste and kieber, 2000), and
the downstream component atein3 are signiﬁcantly
up-regulated in all three senescence experiments, most
rapidly in dis and det (supplemental fig. 6, h and i).
atein2, located between atctr1 and atein3, is not
represented on the array. the atein3 and ateil tfs
regulate gene expression by binding directly to primary
et-response elements in the promoters of various genes.
one immediate target of atein3 is aterf1a (solano
et al., 1998) that appears to be transiently up-regulated
(supplemental fig. 6). aterf1a is a tf whose tran-
scriptional activation requires simultaneously the ja-
and et-signaling pathways (lorenzo et al., 2003). five
other erf proteins are also up-regulated but with
different proﬁles (supplemental fig. 6, k–o). aterf1b,
aterf2, and atebp1 are et-responsive activators of
gcc-box genes (bu¨ ttner and singh, 1997; fujimoto
et al., 2000).the weakly up-regulated atrcd1 modu-
lates et, abscisic acid (aba), and methyl-ja responses
(ahlfors et al., 2004). two uncharacterized putative
tfs, at5g07580 and at5g25190, annotated as possibly
involved in et signaling, are down-regulated (sup-
plemental fig. 6, q and r).
buchanan-wollaston et al. (2005) recently identiﬁed
21 sags that show reduced expression in et- and
ja-deﬁcient plants. of the 19 genes represented on
the agilent microarray (supplemental table xiii), one
yields no signiﬁcant signal. all others are strongly
induced during ns (supplemental fig. 7) and four of
them are known to be involved in ja signaling
(atrns1; supplemental fig. 3l; atnac3; supplemen-
tal fig. 3o), ja biosynthesis (atadox1; supplemental
fig. 3j), and to be sa responsive (at1g19250; supple-
mental fig. 5m). however, as their expression patterns
during dis and det differ, at least some of these genes
are additionally regulated by other signaling path-
ways. a subgroup of six genes appears to be speciﬁc
for developmental senescence as they do not respond
at all to shading or leaf detachment, including the
s-like rnase atrns1, the exopolygalacturonases and
endopolygalacturonases atpga3 and atadpg1, and
the abc-tp atpdr12. another subgroup of genes is
most intensely and apparently transiently up-regulated
in detached leaves and thus possibly responding to
wounding (supplemental fig. 7, j–n).
in summary, these data indicate a coordinated up-
regulation of et-biosynthesis genes during leaf senes-
cence in arabidopsis that is accompanied by changes
in expression of several et-signaling components. it ap-
pears that some downstream response factors are ns-
speciﬁcally and -transiently transcribed at later stages
in senescence development.
auxin
although auxin effects on abscission and senescence
were ﬁrst reported more than 50 years ago (for review,
see noode´n, 1988), the involvement of this hormone in
the senescence development is much less understood
than that of et, ja, or ck. in arabidopsis senescing
leaves, the indole-3-acetic acid (iaa) concentration is
2-fold higher than in nonsenescing leaves (quirino
et al., 1999). however, auxin treatment leads to a tran-
sient decrease in sag12 expression (noh and amasino,
1999). recently,
it was described that the auxin
response factors 1 and 2 (atarf1 and atarf2)
are involved in regulation of abscission and senes-
cence (ellis et al., 2005; okushima et al., 2005). more
than 110 proteins implicated in auxin biosynthesis,
metabolism, transport, and signaling were compiled
from woodward and bartel (2005), remington et al.
(2004), the arabidopsis information resource gene
ontologies, and gene descriptions (supplemental table
xiv). the expression proﬁles of the regulated genes
are shown in supplemental figure 8.
the observation that eight of the 15 (putative) arabi-
dopsis iaa-biosynthesis genes are signiﬁcantly regu-
lated suggests that leaf senescence is associated with
changes in iaa synthesis. a moderate transcriptional
increase of trp synthase a (attsa1; supplemental
fig. 8a) is observed in ns and det, but not dis.
downstream of trp, the arabidopsis amidohydrolase
atami1 converts in vitro indole-3-acetamide to iaa
(pollmann et al., 2003). as atami1 transcription de-
creases during ns, dis, and det (supplemental fig.
8b), the indole-3-acetamide pathway is presumably
not active in senescence. however, six genes encoding
proteins that are supposedly acting in the ipa and/or
iaox pathway are heavily up-regulated (supplemen-
tal fig. 8, c–h). most intriguingly, the iaa1d oxidase
(atao1) and nitrilases atnit1 to 3 that directly con-
vert indole-3-acetaldehyde and indole-3-acetonitrile,
respectively, into iaa are transcriptionally up-regulated.
quirino et al. (1999) have also reported the senescence-
associated induction of atnit1 to 3 and found that
it is accompanied by an increase in iaa and decrease
786
downloaded from 
www.plantphysiol.org
copyright © 2006 american society of plant biologists. all rights reserved.
 on july 2, 2014 - published by 
www.plant.org
plant physiol. vol. 141, 2006
in indole-3-acetonitrile. suspiciously, transcription of
atao1, attsa1, atsur2, and atcyp92b2 remains
almost constant in dark-induced senescence.
iaa homeostasis also is affected by formation and
degradation of iaa conjugates and indole-3-butyric
acid. about one-third of the genes implicated in these
processes are transcriptionally induced during leaf
senescence. three iaa-amino acid synthetases are
massively up-regulated in ns, dis, and det (supple-
mental fig. 8, i–k). these enzymes presumably help to
maintain auxin homeostasis by inactivating excess
iaa (staswick et al., 2005). on the other hand, the
two iaa amidohydrolases atilr1 and atiar3 also are
induced (supplemental fig. 8, l and m) that release
free iaa from iaa-leu, -phe, and -ala and thus
counteract the iaa-amino acid synthetases. moreover,
the three genes atacx1, atacx4, and atped1 encod-
ing acyl-coa oxidases involved in conversion of in-
dole-3-butyric acid into bioactive iaa (zolman et al.,
2000; adham et al., 2005) are also up-regulated (sup-
plemental fig. 8, n, p, and r).
experiments with bean leaves suggested that changes
in auxin gradients rather than the auxin concentration
itself may modulate abscission and senescence devel-
opment (addicott et al., 1955). of 13 tps (suspected to
be) involved in auxin transport, six are massively
down-regulated in ns, dis, and det (supplemental
fig. 8, s–x). the putative iaa permease ataux1 is
localized asymmetrically in the plasma membrane of
certain cells and facilitates iaa loading into the leaf
vascular transport system and iaa unloading in the
primary root apex. atpin3 is one of three down-
regulated proteins from the pin family involved in
auxin efﬂux and expressed in gravity-sensing tissues
like the columella, where it quickly relocates in the cell
plasma membrane to the side oriented toward gravity
when the gravity vector changes. abc tps of the pgp
subfamily were recently identiﬁed as auxin tps (for
review, see geisler and murphy, 2006). atpgp1 and
atpgp19 function in conjunction with twisted
dwarf 1, supposedly as auxin exporters, and are
probably involved in the proper polar distribution of
auxin during plant development. atpgp19 is strongly
down-regulated during senescence (supplemental fig.
8w), and atpgp1 also appears to be weakly down-
regulated, but its expression level remains subsigniﬁ-
cant (supplemental table xiv). interestingly, atpgp4,
which presumably functions as auxin importer in root
caps (terasaka et al., 2005), is up-regulated in senesc-
ing leaves (supplemental fig. 8y). these changes in
expression of auxin tps may contribute to the in-
creased auxin concentration in senescing leaves that
was observed by quirino et al. (1999).
auxin causes changes in the expression of many
genes, and crucial factors in the response pathway are
the arf and aux/iaa proteins. the arabidopsis
atarf and atiaa gene families consist of 23 and 29
members, respectively (remington et al., 2004). ex-
pression of most atarf genes is below the conﬁdence
level in our experiments and does not change in ns,
arabidopsis natural and induced senescence transcriptome
dis, or det. the only exception is monopteros
(atarf5/atmp), which is induced late in natural
senescence (supplemental fig. 9a). atarf5 has not
been assigned a role in senescence yet. recently, reg-
ulation of leaf senescence by atarf1 and 2 and a weak
transcriptional repression/induction of atarf1/atarf2
during senescence have been observed (lin and
wu, 2004; ellis et al., 2005). in our experiments also,
a 2- to 3-fold decrease/increase in atarf1/atarf2
expression can be seen, albeit below the signiﬁcance
threshold. in contrast to the arfs, almost one-half of
the 28 aux/iaa genes are down-regulated during
senescence (supplemental fig. 9, b–n). a function of
aux/iaa proteins in senescence has not yet been
described, but the overall decline in atiaa gene tran-
scription suggests that the quality of auxin responses
in leaves alters as a result of changes in signaling
proteins.
a role of ga and brassinosteroids in senescence?
reports that demonstrate a link between ga activity
and senescence are rare. in pea (pisum sativum), exog-
enous ga3 can delay apical senescence, and endoge-
nous ga concentration is lower in senescing than in
ﬂowering shoots (zhu and davies, 1997). in detached
arabidopsis leaves, ck and to a lower extent ga delay
chlorophyll degradation. however, upon combining
the two hormones, ga partially inhibits the ck effect,
and it is suggested that the spindly protein regulates
this cross talk between the two signaling pathways
(greenboim-wainberg et al., 2005).
fifteen of the 18 genes on the array that are (puta-
tively) involved in ga biosynthesis are expressed at
subsigniﬁcant levels, and none is up-regulated (sup-
plemental table xv). on the other hand, the functional
and ga-inducible ga 2-oxidase 2 (atga2ox2) that
deactivates ga (thomas et al., 1999) is 18-fold up-
regulated (fig. 7a). these results suggest that during
senescence at least some gibberellins are deactivated.
none of the 16 genes that encode (putative) ga-
signaling proteins are up-regulated, and atgasa4 and
atgasa5, two members of the gasa family of short
proteins of unknown function, are down-regulated
(fig. 7, b and c). some ga-responsive genes display
senescence-associated regulation. a well-known exam-
ple is the ga-induced aquaporine attip1.1 (phillips
and huttly, 1994) that is down-regulated, as many
other intrinsic proteins too (fig. 2). intriguingly,
the ga-responsive xyloglucan endotransglycosylase
atmeri5 is massively up-regulated during senescence
(fig. 7d). atmeri5 and other xyloglucan endotrans-
glycosylases are suggested to be involved in cell wall
weakening that is necessary for cell expansion (xu
et al., 1996). studies on attip1.1 and atmeri5 re-
vealed that there is cross talk between the ga and
brassinosteroid (br) pathways. attip1.1 is antagonis-
tically regulated by ga and br, whereas transcription
of atmeri5 was shown to be positively and additively
regulated by either ga or br treatment (kauschmann
plant physiol. vol. 141, 2006
downloaded from 
www.plantphysiol.org
copyright © 2006 american society of plant biologists. all rights reserved.
 on july 2, 2014 - published by 
www.plant.org
787
van der graaff et al.
figure 7. ga and brs. the expression proﬁles of
four senescence-associated ga (a–d) and two br
genes (e and f) are shown. the data were pro-
cessed as described for figure 4.
et al., 1996). as during leaf senescence ga activity
appears to be reduced, the senescence-associated in-
duction of atmeri5 must be effected by a different
regulator, possibly br.
brs appear to promote developmental senescence,
as mutants deﬁcient in br biosynthesis (e.g. det2 ) or
the br receptor bri1 have a retarded senescence pro-
gression (for review, see clouse and sasse, 1998).
however, from a set of 99 br-related genes on the
array (14 biosynthesis and inactivation genes, 11 re-
ceptor and signaling genes, 52 br-induced genes, and
29 br-repressed genes; compiled from mu¨ ssig and
altmann [2003] and lisso et al. [2005]), no clear picture
emerges (supplemental table xvi). of the br-induced
genes, 15 and 14 were signiﬁcantly expressed and
up- or down-regulated during ns, respectively. of the
br-repressed genes, 13 were up- and 5 were down-
regulated. two of the 14 (putative) biosynthesis genes
are down-regulated (atcpd/at5g05690 and at3g55360;
data not shown) and none is up-regulated, suggesting
that br biosynthesis does not signiﬁcantly increase
during senescence. central transmitters of the br sig-
nal from the receptor(s) to the target genes are the
atbin2 kinase and the two nearly identical transcrip-
tional modulators and regulators of br signaling,
atbes1 and atbzr1. atbin2 and atbzr1 show no
signiﬁcant change in expression, whereas atbes1 is
down-regulated (fig. 7e).
the br receptors atbrl1 and atbrl3 supposedly
function speciﬁcally in provascular differentiation
(cano-delgado et al., 2004). as atbrl3 is strongly
up-regulated in later stages of ns, dis, and det (fig.
7f), one could speculate that br modulates the prop-
erties of the vascular tissue in senescing leaves toward
efﬁcient export of metabolites.
aba
as treatment with aba can induce leaf senescence,
aba is considered a promoter of senescence (noode´n,
1988). in arabidopsis, aba induces expression of
several sags. vice versa, during senescence several
788
downloaded from 
www.plantphysiol.org
copyright © 2006 american society of plant biologists. all rights reserved.
 on july 2, 2014 - published by 
www.plant.org
plant physiol. vol. 141, 2006
genes are up-regulated that are involved in aba
synthesis, metabolism, or signaling (oh et al., 1996;
weaver et al., 1998; he et al., 2001; buchanan-wollaston
et al., 2005). we investigated the expression proﬁles
of 58 aba-biosynthesis, -metabolism, and -signaling
genes (supplemental table xvii). four of 11 aba-
biosynthesis genes are up-regulated,
including the
9-cis-epoxycarotenoid dioxygenases atnced2 and 3
that catalyze the cleavage of neoxanthin and the
abscisic aldehyde oxidases ataao3 and 4 (supple-
mental fig. 10, a–d). on the other hand, the aba-
inactivating glucosylase ugt71b6 (priest et al., 2005)
is also up-regulated during ns (supplemental fig. 10e).
of 30 aba-signaling genes, eight are up-regulated
and only two are down-regulated (supplemental fig.
10, f–o). of 12 negative regulators of aba responses,
ﬁve protein phosphatases 2c are up-regulated (sup-
plemental fig. 10, p–t). the aba-responsive atsen1
gene is up-regulated during senescence (supplemen-
tal fig. 10u) as described by oh et al. (1996). the aba-
repressible atpip1.5 and atpip2.6 genes (jang et al.,
2004), but also the aba-inducible atpip2.2, are down-
regulated during senescence (supplemental fig. 10,
v–x). these complex and, for several aba-related
genes, opposite regulation patterns during natural
and induced senescence support the notion that aba
is a modulator of senescence-associated physiological
changes.
conclusion
leaf senescence is a slow-going, ps cellular reorga-
nization process that ensures the mobilization and
export of nutrients from the cells before they die. in
young and old rosette leaves, different nutrient and
assimilate ﬂuxes take place, raising the question
whether the same tps are active during these devel-
opmental stages. during ns,
the fraction of up-
regulated tps is approximately 1.5 times higher than
that of all genes and 2.5 times higher than that of
down-regulated tps. this supports the notion that
during senescence there is an increased demand for
transport across membranes and that speciﬁc tps
fulﬁll this need.
in this study, different gene categories were ana-
lyzed for senescence-associated transcriptional regu-
lation of ps genes versus genes found also in ao.
senescence-associated transport functions appear not
to be predominantly provided by ps tps, as similar
fractions of the regulated tps are ps or ao. also,
signal recognition and transmission processes active
during senescence and involving rlks are not exe-
cuted by ps proteins, although during ns (but not dis
and det) almost 3 times more rlk genes are up- than
down-regulated. the plant lineage has a dramatically
expanded number of rlks compared to animals. it
was hypothesized that this expansion in plants repre-
sents a ps adaptation for extracellular signal sensing
and involves mostly defense/resistance-related genes
arabidopsis natural and induced senescence transcriptome
(shiu and bleecker, 2003; shiu et al., 2004). however,
the rlk clade has not diverged enough from the rlks
in non-plants to be classiﬁed as ps (gutierrez et al.,
2004a), possibly indicating that plants have no distinct,
ps, rlk-dependent signal transduction mechanisms.
an opposite bias of ps versus ao genes regulated
during senescence is observed for the tfs. this sug-
gests that ps tfs are key players in the regulatory
pathways leading to and coordinating leaf senescence.
gan (2003) and buchanan-wollaston et al. (2005)
presented models illustrating the pathways that op-
erate in senescence. the analysis in this study of
hormone homeostasis and signaling genes adds more
details to this model and reveals additional sags in
most pathways of the regulatory network. the ex-
pression proﬁles of genes involved in ck homeosta-
sis are mostly consistent with a depletion of this
hormone during senescence. however, the expression
of ck-signaling genes indicates a more complex pic-
ture, as about 20% of the immediate ck-response
genes (brenner et al., 2005) are up-regulated during
ns, among them the a-type response regulator
atarr16. in the ja pathway, the senescence-type
speciﬁcity of some genes is striking. the expression
proﬁles are consistent with the hypothesis that, dur-
ing ns and upon wounding, different ja synthesis
isozymes are activated, whereas during dis ja bio-
synthesis is not induced. differential activation de-
pending on the senescence condition is also apparent
for the sa pathway. the expression proﬁles of sa-
biosynthesis and -response genes support the notion
that sa is an important and speciﬁc regulator in
developmental senescence. in addition, they suggest
that sa is not involved in artiﬁcially induced senes-
cence. in the et pathway, a coordinated up-regulation
of et-biosynthesis genes during senescence is ob-
served. differences between the senescence types are
not as obvious as in the ja and sa pathways, except
a tendency of et-response factors for transient up-
regulation during ns. previous evidence for a role of
auxin in the senescence program is rather circumstan-
tial; however, the complex expression patterns of
auxin homeostasis genes suggest a participation of
this hormone in arabidopsis leaf senescence regula-
tion. auxin-biosynthesis genes are preferentially up-
regulated, but also auxin conjugate formation and
metabolism genes, whereas iaa tps and aux/iaa
genes are mostly down-regulated. also, gas and brs
have only rarely been reported as regulators of senes-
cence. the data shown here are compatible with a
decrease in gas during senescence. for the br-related
genes, no clear picture emerges from the expression
studies. aba can promote senescence and induce
expression of several sags. the expression proﬁles
of aba-related genes are consistent with increasing
aba levels and senescence-dependent alterations in
aba signaling. however, as some aba-response
genes are up- and others down-regulated, an estimate
of the impact of aba as a regulator during senescence
is not straightforward.
plant physiol. vol. 141, 2006
downloaded from 
www.plantphysiol.org
copyright © 2006 american society of plant biologists. all rights reserved.
 on july 2, 2014 - published by 
www.plant.org
789
van der graaff et al.
materials and methods
plant material
wild-type arabidopsis (arabidopsis thaliana; columbia-0) ﬁfth and sixth
rosette leaves grown under greenhouse conditions supplemented with arti-
ﬁcial light (16 h light, 21°c; 8 h dark, 19°c) were used throughout all
experiments. in each senescence experiment, the ﬁfth and sixth rosette leaves
from 4-week-old leaf material served as reference for the other time points.
each senescence experiment was repeated once with independently grown
plants as a biological replicate. the two batches of plants were grown may to
june 2003 and december 2003 to january 2004.
ns
leaves were harvested at six developmental stages from the start of the
rapid expansion phase at the 4-week-old (4w) stage (28 d after germination)
until the late senescent stage, with up to 75% of the leaf surface exhibiting
chlorophyll degradation (yellowing) during the silique ripening stage (53 d
after germination), corresponding to principal growth stages 3.50 to 8.00
(boyes et al., 2001; table i).
dis
tc system (http://www.tcdb.org; saier, 2000; busch and saier, 2004) and
incorporated into the aramemnon plant membrane protein database
(http://aramemnon.botanik.uni-koeln.de; schwacke et al., 2003). the classi-
ﬁcation of (receptor-like) kinases was adopted from shiu and bleecker (2003)
and shiu et al. (2004). the ps genes were obtained from the plant speciﬁc
database (psdb; http://genomics.msu.edu/plant_speciﬁc/; gutierrez et al.,
2004a, 2004b). tfs were compiled from dtaf (http://datf.cbi.pku.edu.cn/),
attfdb (http://arabidopsis.med.ohio-state.edu/attfdb/), and rartf
(http://rarge.gsc.riken.jp/rartf/). the complete list of (re)classiﬁed and par-
tially renamed proteins is provided in supplemental table i.
acknowledgments
we thank sonja hetfeld and carmen zinßmeister for excellent technical
work on the array hybridizations; dr. andreas oberthu¨ r for granting us
access to the agilent scanner, nanodrop, and bioanalyser; dr. andreas polten
for technical support; and dr. christine rausch for critical reading of the
manuscript.
received february 15, 2006; revised april 4, 2006; accepted april 5, 2006;
published april 7, 2006.
leaves were wrapped in aluminum foil at the 4-week-old stage and
harvested 2, 4, 6, and 9 d later.
literature cited
det
four-week-old leaves were detached and harvested after incubation for 2,
5, and 6 d in petri dishes on water in the dark.
chlorophyll content
the chlorophyll content in the different leaf samples was determined as
described by graan and ort (1984).
hybridization of arabidopsis microarrays
and data analysis
total rna was puriﬁed using the rneasy kit (qiagen), and quality was
assayed using an agilent 2100 bioanalyzer. total rna (500 ng) was labeled
with either cyanine 3-ctp or cyanine 5-ctp (perkin-elmer) using the agilent
low-input linear ampliﬁcation kit, and dye incorporation was determined
using a nanodrop spectrophotometer. labeled rna was hybridized to
agilent arabidopsis 2 microarrays according to manufacturer’s instructions.
the experiments were designed following a common reference model
(ko¨ nig et al., 2004). each slide within one experiment (ns, dis, or det) was
hybridized with cy3-labeled 4-week reference cdna derived from one single
labeling reaction and cy5-labeled stage-speciﬁc cdna. each microarray
hybridization was repeated with cy5-labeled reference cdna and cy3-
labeled stage-speciﬁc cdna (dye-swap). thus, for each gene and stage, four
data points were generated (two biological replicates times two technical
replicates).
microarrays were scanned on an agilent g2565 scanner, and images were
extracted and quality assessed with the agilent feature extraction version 7.5
software using the default settings. the expression values of all individual
hybridizations were normalized by setting the median expression value of the
arabidopsis genes (21,500 genes) in the control channel (4w for ns or 4w/0 d
for det and dis) for each microarray slide to 1,000. the signiﬁcantly regulated
genes in both biological replicates were clustered by the k-means algorithm in
seven groups based on their averaged log2-based expression ratios with the
cluster 3.0 program (de hoon et al., 2004; for details, see supplemental ﬁle
‘‘data analysis’’).
sources for protein classiﬁcation
addicott ft, lynch rs, carns hr (1955) auxin gradient theory of abscis-
sion regulation. science 121: 644–645
adham ar, zolman bk, millius a, bartel b (2005) mutations in arabi-
dopsis acyl-coa oxidase genes reveal distinct and overlapping roles in
beta-oxidation. plant j 41: 859–874
ahlfors r, lang s, overmyer k, jaspers p, brosche m, tauriainen a,
kollist h, tuominen h, belles-boix e, piippo m, et al (2004) arabi-
dopsis radical-induced cell death1 belongs to the wwe
protein-protein interaction domain protein family and modulates ab-
scisic acid, ethylene, and methyl jasmonate responses. plant cell 16:
1925–1937
allemeersch j, durinck s, vanderhaeghen r, alard p, maes r, seeuws k,
bogaert t, coddens k, deschouwer k, van hummelen p, et al (2005)
benchmarking the catma microarray. a novel tool for arabidopsis
transcriptome analysis. plant physiol 137: 588–601
arabidopsis genome initiative (2000) analysis of the genome sequence of
the ﬂowering plant arabidopsis thaliana. nature 408: 796–815
becker w, apel k (1993) differences in gene expression between natural
and artiﬁcially induced leaf senescence. planta 189: 74–79
boyes dc, zayed am, ascenzi r, mccaskill aj, hoffman ne, davis kr,
gorlach j (2001) growth stage-based phenotypic analysis of arabidop-
sis: a model for high throughput functional genomics in plants. plant
cell 13: 1499–1510
brenner wg, romanov ga, kollmer i, bu¨ rkle l, schmu¨ lling t (2005)
immediate-early and delayed cytokinin response genes of arabidopsis
thaliana identiﬁed by genome-wide expression proﬁling reveal novel
cytokinin-sensitive processes and suggest cytokinin action through
transcriptional cascades. plant j 44: 314–333
buchanan-wollaston v, earl s, harrison e, mathas e, navabpour s, page
t, pink d (2003) the molecular analysis of leaf senescence: a genomics
approach. plant biotechnol j 1: 3–22
buchanan-wollaston v, page t, harrison e, breeze e, lim po, nam hg,
lin jf, wu sh, swidzinski j, ishizaki k, leaver cj (2005) comparative
transcriptome analysis reveals signiﬁcant differences in gene expression
and signalling pathways between developmental and dark/starvation-
induced senescence in arabidopsis. plant j 42: 567–585
bu¨ rkle l, cedzich a, do¨ pke c, stransky h, okumoto s, gillissen b,
ku¨ hn c, frommer wb (2003) transport of cytokinins mediated by
purine transporters of the pup family expressed in phloem, hyda-
thodes, and pollen of arabidopsis. plant j 34: 13–26
busch w, saier mh jr (2004) the iubmb-endorsed transporter classiﬁca-
tion system. mol biotechnol 27: 253–262
arabidopsis protein designations were from the institute for genomic
research arabidopsis database release 5. the general functional categories
were adopted from mips (http://mips.gsf.de/projects/funcat; ruepp et al.,
2004). the classiﬁcation of arabidopsis tps was performed on the basis of the
bu¨ ttner m, singh kb (1997) arabidopsis thaliana ethylene-responsive
element binding protein (atebp), an ethylene-inducible, gcc box
dna-binding protein interacts with an ocs element binding protein.
proc natl acad sci usa 94: 5961–5966
790
downloaded from 
www.plantphysiol.org
copyright © 2006 american society of plant biologists. all rights reserved.
 on july 2, 2014 - published by 
www.plant.org
plant physiol. vol. 141, 2006
cano-delgado a, yin y, yu c, vafeados d, mora-garcia s, cheng jc, nam
kh, li j, chory j (2004) brl1 and brl3 are novel brassinosteroid
receptors that
function in vascular differentiation in arabidopsis.
development 131: 5341–5351
chen k, du l, chen z (2003) sensitization of defense responses and
activation of programmed cell death by a pathogen-induced receptor-
like protein kinase in arabidopsis. plant mol biol 53: 61–74
chen k, fan b, du l, chen z (2004) activation of hypersensitive cell death
by pathogen-induced receptor-like protein kinases from arabidopsis.
plant mol biol 56: 271–283
chen w, provart nj, glazebrook j, katagiri f, chang hs, eulgem t,
mauch f, luan s, zou g, whitham sa, et al (2002) expression proﬁle
matrix of arabidopsis transcription factor genes suggests their putative
functions in response to environmental stresses. plant cell 14: 559–574
clouse sd, sasse jm (1998) brassinosteroids: essential regulators of
plant growth and development. annu rev plant physiol plant mol biol
49: 427–451
contento al, kim sj, bassham dc (2004) transcriptome proﬁling of the
response of arabidopsis suspension culture cells to suc starvation. plant
physiol 135: 2330–2347
d’agostino ib, deruere j, kieber jj (2000) characterization of the re-
sponse of the arabidopsis response regulator gene family to cytokinin.
plant physiol 124: 1706–1717
de hoon mj, imoto s, nolan j, miyano s (2004) open source clustering
software. bioinformatics 20: 1453–1454
doelling jh, walker jm, friedman em, thompson ar, vierstra rd
(2002) the apg8/12-activating enzyme apg7 is required for proper
nutrient recycling and senescence in arabidopsis thaliana. j biol chem
277: 33105–33114
ellis cm, nagpal p, young jc, hagen g, guilfoyle tj, reed jw (2005)
auxin response factor1 and auxin response factor2 reg-
ulate senescence and ﬂoral organ abscission in arabidopsis thaliana.
development 132: 4563–4574
fujimoto sy, ohta m, usui a, shinshi h, ohme-takagi m (2000)
arabidopsis ethylene-responsive element binding factors act as tran-
scriptional activators or repressors of gcc box-mediated gene expres-
sion. plant cell 12: 393–404
gan s (2003) mitotic and postmitotic senescence in plants. sci sage ke
2003: re7
gan s, amasino rm (1995) inhibition of leaf senescence by autoregulated
production of cytokinin. science 270: 1986–1988
geisler m, murphy as (2006) the abc of auxin transport: the role of
p-glycoproteins in plant development. febs lett 580: 1094–1102
graan t, ort dr (1984) quantitation of the rapid electron donors to p700,
the functional plastoquinone pool, and the ratio of the photosystems in
spinach chloroplasts. j biol chem 259: 14003–14010
grbic v, bleecker ab (1995) ethylene regulates the timing of leaf senes-
cence in arabidopsis. plant j 8: 595–602
greenboim-wainberg y, maymon i, borochov r, alvarez j, olszewski n,
ori n, eshed y, weiss d (2005) cross talk between gibberellin and
cytokinin: the arabidopsis ga response inhibitor spindly plays a
positive role in cytokinin signaling. plant cell 17: 92–102
guo y, cai z, gan s (2004) transcriptome of arabidopsis leaf senescence.
plant cell environ 27: 521–549
gutierrez ra, green pj, keegstra k, ohlrogge jb (2004a) phylogenetic
proﬁling of the arabidopsis thaliana proteome: what proteins distin-
guish plants from other organisms? genome biol 5: r53
gutierrez ra, larson md, wilkerson c (2004b) the plant-speciﬁc data-
base. classiﬁcation of arabidopsis proteins based on their phylogenetic
proﬁle. plant physiol 135: 1888–1892
hajouj t, michelis r, gepstein s (2000) cloning and characterization of a
receptor-like protein kinase gene associated with senescence. plant
physiol 124: 1305–1314
hanaoka h, noda t, shirano y, kato t, hayashi h, shibata d, tabata s,
ohsumi y (2002) leaf senescence and starvation-induced chlorosis are
accelerated by the disruption of an arabidopsis autophagy gene. plant
physiol 129: 1181–1193
he y, fukushige h, hildebrand df, gan s (2002) evidence supporting a
role of jasmonic acid in arabidopsis leaf senescence. plant physiol 128:
876–884
he y, gan s (2003) molecular characteristics of leaf senescence. in sg
pandalai, ed, recent research developments in plant molecular biology,
vol 1. research signpost, kerala, india, pp 1–17
arabidopsis natural and induced senescence transcriptome
he y, tang w, swain jd, green al, jack tp, gan s (2001) networking
senescence-regulating pathways by using arabidopsis enhancer trap
lines. plant physiol 126: 707–716
himelblau e, amasino rm (2001) nutrients mobilized from leaves of
j plant physiol 158:
arabidopsis thaliana during leaf senescence.
1317–1323
hinderhofer k, zentgraf u (2001) identiﬁcation of a transcription factor
speciﬁcally expressed at the onset of leaf senescence. planta 213: 469–473
ho¨ rtensteiner s, feller u (2002) nitrogen metabolism and remobilization
during senescence. j exp bot 53: 927–937
hou b, lim ek, higgins gs, bowles dj (2004) n-glucosylation of cyto-
kinins by glycosyltransferases of arabidopsis thaliana. j biol chem 279:
47822–47832
hwang i, chen hc, sheen j (2002) two-component signal transduction
pathways in arabidopsis. plant physiol 129: 500–515
jang jy, kim dg, kim yo, kim js, kang h (2004) an expression analysis
of a gene family encoding plasma membrane aquaporins in response to
abiotic stresses in arabidopsis thaliana. plant mol biol 54: 713–725
jing hc, sturre mj, hille j, dijkwel pp (2002) arabidopsis onset of leaf
death mutants identify a regulatory pathway controlling leaf senes-
cence. plant j 32: 51–63
kauschmann a, jessop a, koncz c, szekeres m, willmitzer l, altmann t
(1996) genetic evidence for an essential role of brassinosteroids in plant
development. plant j 9: 701–714
kiba t, naitou t, koizumi n, yamashino t, sakakibara h, mizuno t
(2005) combinatorial microarray analysis revealing arabidopsis genes
implicated in cytokinin responses through the his-.asp phosphorelay
circuitry. plant cell physiol 46: 339–355
ko¨ nig r, baldessari d, pollet n, niehrs c, eils r (2004) reliability of gene
expression ratios for cdna microarrays in multiconditional experi-
ments with a reference design. nucleic acids res 32: e29
lebrasseur nd, macintosh gc, perez-amador ma, saitoh m, green pj
(2002) local and systemic wound-induction of rnase and nuclease
activities in arabidopsis: rns1 as a marker for a ja-independent
systemic signaling pathway. plant j 29: 393–403
lin jf, wu sh (2004) molecular events in senescing arabidopsis leaves.
plant j 39: 612–628
lisso j, steinhauser d, altmann t, kopka j, mussig c (2005) identiﬁca-
tion of brassinosteroid-related genes by means of transcript co-response
analyses. nucleic acids res 33: 2685–2696
lorenzo o, piqueras r, sanchez-serrano jj, solano r (2003) ethylene
response factor1 integrates signals from ethylene and jasmonate
pathways in plant defense. plant cell 15: 165–178
morris k, mackerness sa, page t, john cf, murphy am, carr jp,
buchanan-wollaston v (2000) salicylic acid has a role in regulating
gene expression during leaf senescence. plant j 23: 677–685
mu¨ ssig c, altmann t (2003) changes in gene expression in response to
altered shl transcript levels. plant mol biol 53: 805–820
nawrath c, heck s, parinthawong n, metraux jp (2002) eds5, an essential
component of salicylic acid-dependent signaling for disease resistance
in arabidopsis, is a member of the mate transporter family. plant cell
14: 275–286
noh ys, amasino rm (1999) identiﬁcation of a promoter region respon-
sible for the senescence-speciﬁc expression of sag12. plant mol biol 41:
181–194
noode´ n ld (1988) abscisic acid, auxin, and other regulators of senescence.
in ld noode´n, ac leopold, eds, senescence and aging in plants.
academic press, san diego, pp 329–368
noode´ n ld, guiame´ t jj, john i (1997) senescence mechanisms. physiol
plant 101: 746–753
oh sa, lee sy, chung ik, lee ch, nam hg (1996) a senescence-
associated gene of arabidopsis thaliana is distinctively regulated dur-
ing natural and artiﬁcially induced leaf senescence. plant mol biol 30:
739–754
oh sa, park jh, lee gi, paek kh, park sk, nam hg (1997) identiﬁcation
of three genetic loci controlling leaf senescence in arabidopsis thaliana.
plant j 12: 527–535
okushima y, mitina i, quach hl, theologis a (2005) auxin response
factor 2 (arf2): a pleiotropic developmental regulator. plant j 43:
29–46
park jh, oh sa, kim yh, woo hr, nam hg (1998) differential expression
of senescence-associated mrnas during leaf senescence induced by
plant physiol. vol. 141, 2006
downloaded from 
www.plantphysiol.org
copyright © 2006 american society of plant biologists. all rights reserved.
 on july 2, 2014 - published by 
www.plant.org
791
van der graaff et al.
different senescence-inducing factors in arabidopsis. plant mol biol 37:
445–454
insensitive3 and ethylene-response-factor1. genes dev 12:
3703–3714
phillips al, huttly ak (1994) cloning of two gibberellin-regulated cdnas
from arabidopsis thaliana by subtractive hybridization: expression of
the tonoplast water channel, gamma-tip, is increased by ga3. plant mol
biol 24: 603–615
piotrowski m, schonfelder s, weiler ew (2001) the arabidopsis thaliana
isogene nit4 and its orthologs in tobacco encode beta-cyano-l-alanine
hydratase/nitrilase. j biol chem 276: 2616–2621
pollmann s, neu d, weiler ew (2003) molecular cloning and character-
ization of an amidase from arabidopsis thaliana capable of converting
indole-3-acetamide into the plant growth hormone, indole-3-acetic acid.
phytochemistry 62: 293–300
priest dm, jackson rg, ashford da, abrams sr, bowles dj (2005) the
use of abscisic acid analogues to analyse the substrate selectivity of
ugt71b6, a udp-glycosyltransferase of arabidopsis thaliana. febs lett
579: 4454–4458
quirino bf, normanly j, amasino rm (1999) diverse range of gene
activity during arabidopsis thaliana leaf senescence includes pathogen-
independent induction of defense-related genes. plant mol biol 40:
267–278
quirino bf, reiter wd, amasino rd (2001) one of two tandem arabi-
dopsis genes homologous to monosaccharide transporters is senes-
cence-associated. plant mol biol 46: 447–457
rashotte am, carson sd, to jp, kieber jj (2003) expression proﬁling of
cytokinin action in arabidopsis. plant physiol 132: 1998–2011
remington dl, vision tj, guilfoyle tj, reed jw (2004) contrasting
modes of diversiﬁcation in the aux/iaa and arf gene families. plant
physiol 135: 1738–1752
robatzek s, somssich ie (2002) targets of atwrky6 regulation during
plant senescence and pathogen defense. genes dev 16: 1139–1149
rose tl, bonneau l, der c, marty-mazars d, marty f (2006) starvation-
induced expression of autophagy-related genes in arabidopsis. biol
cell 98: 53–67
ruepp a, zollner a, maier d, albermann k, hani j, mokrejs m, tetko i,
guldener u, mannhaupt g, munsterkotter m, et al (2004) the funcat,
a functional annotation scheme for systematic classiﬁcation of proteins
from whole genomes. nucleic acids res 32: 5539–5545
saier mh jr (2000) a functional-phylogenetic classiﬁcation system for
transmembrane solute transporters. microbiol mol biol rev 64: 354–411
schmu¨ lling t, werner t, rieﬂer m, krupkova e, bartrina y manns i (2003)
structure and function of cytokinin oxidase/dehydrogenase genes of
maize, rice, arabidopsis and other species. j plant res 116: 241–252
schoof h, ernst r, nazarov v, pfeifer l, mewes hw, mayer kf (2004)
mips arabidopsis thaliana database (matdb): an integrated biological
knowledge resource for plant genomics. nucleic acids res (database
issue) 32: d373–d376
schwacke r, schneider a, van der graaff e, fischer k, catoni e,
desimone m, frommer wb, flu¨ gge ui, kunze r (2003) aramemnon,
a novel database for arabidopsis integral membrane proteins. plant
physiol 131: 16–26
shiu sh, bleecker ab (2001) receptor-like kinases from arabidopsis form
a monophyletic gene family related to animal receptor kinases. proc
natl acad sci usa 98: 10763–10768
shiu sh, bleecker ab (2003) expansion of the receptor-like kinase/pelle
gene family and receptor-like proteins in arabidopsis. plant physiol
132: 530–543
shiu sh, karlowski wm, pan r, tzeng yh, mayer kf, li wh (2004)
comparative analysis of the receptor-like kinase family in arabidopsis
and rice. plant cell 16: 1220–1234
smart cm, scoﬁeld sr, bevan mw, dyer ta (1991) delayed leaf senes-
cence in tobacco plants transformed with tmr, a gene for cytokinin
production in agrobacterium. plant cell 3: 647–656
solano r, stepanova a, chao q, ecker jr (1998) nuclear events in
ethylene signaling: a transcriptional cascade mediated by ethylene-
soudry e, ulitzur s, gepstein s (2005) accumulation and remobilization
of amino acids during senescence of detached and attached leaves: in
planta analysis of tryptophan levels by recombinant luminescent bac-
teria. j exp bot 56: 695–702
staswick pe, serban b, rowe m, tiryaki i, maldonado mt, maldonado
mc, suza w (2005) characterization of an arabidopsis enzyme family
that conjugates amino acids to indole-3-acetic acid. plant cell 17:
616–627
terasaka k, blakeslee jj, titapiwatanakun b, peer wa, bandyopadhyay
a, makam sn, lee or, richards el, murphy as, sato f, et al (2005)
pgp4, an atp binding cassette p-glycoprotein, catalyzes auxin trans-
port in arabidopsis thaliana roots. plant cell 17: 2922–2939
thomas sg, phillips al, hedden p (1999) molecular cloning and func-
tional expression of gibberellin 2-oxidases, multifunctional enzymes
involved in gibberellin deactivation. proc natl acad sci usa 96:
4698–4703
thompson ar, doelling jh, suttangkakul a, vierstra rd (2005) auto-
phagic nutrient recycling in arabidopsis directed by the atg8 and
atg12 conjugation pathways. plant physiol 138: 2097–2110
tsuchisaka a, theologis a (2004) unique and overlapping expression
patterns among the arabidopsis 1-amino-cyclopropane-1-carboxylate
synthase gene family members. plant physiol 136: 2982–3000
weaver lm, amasino rm (2001) senescence is induced in individually
darkened arabidopsis leaves, but inhibited in whole darkened plants.
plant physiol 127: 876–886
weaver lm, gan s, quirino b, amasino rm (1998) a comparison of the
expression patterns of several senescence-associated genes in response
to stress and hormone treatment. plant mol biol 37: 455–469
werner t, motyka v, laucou v, smets r, van onckelen h, schmu¨ lling t
(2003) cytokinin-deﬁcient transgenic arabidopsis plants show multiple
developmental alterations indicating opposite functions of cytokinins
in the regulation of shoot and root meristem activity. plant cell 15:
2532–2550
wiermer m, feys bj, parker je (2005) plant immunity: the eds1 regulatory
node. curr opin plant biol 8: 383–389
woeste ke, kieber jj (2000) a strong loss-of-function mutation in ran1
results in constitutive activation of the ethylene response pathway as
well as a rosette-lethal phenotype. plant cell 12: 443–455
woodward aw, bartel b (2005) auxin: regulation, action, and interaction.
ann bot (lond) 95: 707–735
xiao s, dai l, liu f, wang z, peng w, xie d (2004) cos1: an arabidopsis
coronatine insensitive1 suppressor essential for regulation of jasmonate-
mediated plant defense and senescence. plant cell 16: 1132–1142
xiong y, contento al, bassham dc (2005) atatg18a is required for the
formation of autophagosomes during nutrient stress and senescence in
arabidopsis thaliana. plant j 42: 535–546
xu w, campbell p, vargheese ak, braam j (1996) the arabidopsis xet-
related gene family: environmental and hormonal regulation of expres-
sion. plant j 9: 879–889
yoshimoto k, hanaoka h, sato s, kato t, tabata s, noda t, ohsumi y
(2004) processing of atg8s, ubiquitin-like proteins, and their deconju-
gation by atg4s are essential for plant autophagy. plant cell 16:
2967–2983
zentgraf u, jobst j, kolb d, rentsch d (2004) senescence-related gene
expression proﬁles of rosette leaves of arabidopsis thaliana: leaf age
versus plant age. plant biol 6: 178–183
zhu yx, davies pj (1997) the control of apical bud growth and senescence
by auxin and gibberellin in genetic lines of peas. plant physiol 113:
631–637
zolman bk, yoder a, bartel b (2000) genetic analysis of indole-3-butyric
acid responses in arabidopsis thaliana reveals four mutant classes.
genetics 156: 1323–1337
792
downloaded from 
www.plantphysiol.org
copyright © 2006 american society of plant biologists. all rights reserved.
 on july 2, 2014 - published by 
www.plant.org
plant physiol. vol. 141, 2006