the journal of biological chemistry vol. 282, no. 8, pp. 5736 –5748, february 23, 2007
© 2007 by the american society for biochemistry and molecular biology, inc. printed in the u.s.a.
␣-synuclein stimulates differentiation of osteosarcoma cells
relevance to down-regulation of proteasome activity*
received for publication, june 28, 2006, and in revised form, december 15, 2006 published, jbc papers in press, december 22, 2006, doi 10.1074/jbc.m606175200
masayo fujita‡, shuei sugama‡, masaaki nakai‡, takato takenouchi§, jianshe wei‡, tomohiko urano¶,
satoshi inoue¶, and makoto hashimoto‡1
from the ‡laboratory for chemistry and metabolism, tokyo metropolitan institute for neuroscience, fuchu, tokyo 183-8526,
japan, §transgenic animal research center, national institute of agrobiological sciences, tsukuba, ibaraki 305-8634, japan,
and ¶department of geriatrics and gerontology, school of medicine, university of tokyo, tokyo 113-8655, japan
because a limited study previously showed that ␣-synuclein
(␣-syn), the major pathogenic protein for parkinson disease,
was expressed in differentiating brain tumors as well as vari-
ous peripheral cancers, the main objective of the present
study was to determine whether ␣-syn might be involved in
the regulation of tumor differentiation. for this purpose,
␣-syn and its non-amyloidogenic homologue ␤-syn were sta-
bly transfected to human osteosarcoma mg63 cell line. com-
pared with ␤-syn-overexpressing and vector-transfected
cells, ␣-syn-overexpressing cells exhibited distinct features
of differentiated osteoblastic phenotype, as shown by up-reg-
ulation of alkaline phosphatase and osteocalcin as well as
inductive matrix mineralization. further studies revealed
that proteasome activity was significantly decreased in
␣-syn-overexpressing cells compared with other cell types,
consistent with the fact that proteasome inhibitors stimulate
differentiation of various osteoblastic cells. in ␣-syn-overex-
pressing cells, protein kinase c (pkc) activity was signifi-
cantly decreased, and reactivation of pkc by phorbol ester
significantly restored the proteasome activity and abrogated
cellular differentiation. moreover, activity of lysosome was
up-regulated in ␣-syn-overexpressing cells, and treatment of
these cells with autophagy-lysosomal inhibitors resulted in a
decrease of proteasome activity associated with up-regula-
tion of ␣-syn expression, leading to enhance cellular differ-
entiation. taken together, these results suggest that the stim-
ulatory effect of ␣-syn on tumor differentiation may be
attributed to down-regulation of proteasome, which is fur-
ther modulated by alterations of various factors, such as pro-
tein kinase c signaling pathway and a autophagy-lysosomal
degradation system. thus, the mechanism of ␣-syn regula-
tion of tumor differentiation and neuropathological effects of
␣-syn may considerably overlap with each other.
* this work was supported in part by a grant-in-aid for science research
from the ministry of education, culture, sports, science, and technol-
ogy, japan and a project grant from tokyo metropolitan organization.
the costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the
payment of page charges. this article must therefore be hereby marked
“advertisement” in accordance with 18 u.s.c. section 1734 solely to indi-
cate this fact.
1 to whom correspondence should be addressed: laboratory for chemistry
and metabolism, tokyo metropolitan institute for neuroscience, 2– 6
musashidai, fuchu, tokyo 183-8526, japan. tel.: 81-42-325-3881; fax:
81-42-321-8678; e-mail address: mhashimoto@tmin.ac.jp.
␣-synuclein (␣-syn)2 is a presynaptic protein that belongs to
the syn family of peptides with two other members, ␤- and
␥-syn (1, 2). these proteins are characterized by a native
unfolded structure with a highly conserved n-terminal region
and a divergent c-terminal acidic region (3). however, the most
striking feature is that ␣-syn possesses a highly hydrophobic
domain in the middle region that was previously purified from
alzheimer disease brain amyloid (4). due to this hydrophobic
domain, ␣-syn forms toxic protofibrils that might cause synap-
tic injury and dysfunction (5). the importance of ␣-syn in the
pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disorders was further aug-
mented by identification of missense mutations of ␣-syn in
familial parkinson disease (pd) (6–8). subsequently, numer-
ous histological studies have shown that ␣-syn is a major con-
stituent in lewy bodies and dystrophic neuritis in sporadic pd
and diffuse lewy body disease (2). immunoreactivity of ␣-syn
was also shown in glial cell inclusions in multiple system atro-
phy (2). by contrast, ␤-syn, which lacks the majority of the
hydrophobic domain in the middle region, was protective
against protofibrils of ␣-syn (9, 10). thus, these results support
the contention that ␣- and ␤-syn may play a central role in the
pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases.
on the other hand, ␥-syn, the less conserved third member of
the syn family of peptides, was identified as a breast cancer-
specific gene product (11) and has been extensively studied in a
variety of cancers, such as breast cancer, ovarian cancer, liver
cancer, pancreatic adenocarcinoma, and bladder cancer (11–
15). because expression levels of ␥-syn were well correlated
with the presence of metastatic lesions, it has been generally
thought that ␥-syn might regulate tumor invasiveness and
metastasis (16, 17). several studies indicated that ␥-syn might
be involved in the deregulation of cell cycle in cancer. for exam-
ple, ␥-syn interacted with a mitotic spindle checkpoint protein,
bubr1, leading to decreased checkpoint function and tumor
progression (18, 19). moreover, ␥-syn stimulated cell prolifer-
ation by augmenting estrogen receptor-mediated signaling in
breast cancer cells (20). thus, the role of ␥-syn has been inves-
tigated mainly in the area of tumor biology.
2 the abbreviations used are: syn, synuclein; pd, parkinson disease; ups, ubiq-
uitin-proteasome system; pkc, protein kinase c; pma, 12-myristate 13-ac-
etate; 4␣pdd, 4␣-phorbol 12,13-didecanoate; 3-ma, 3-methyladenine; rb,
retinoblastoma; rt, reverse transcriptase; caps, 3-(cyclohexylamino)-1-
propanesulfonic acid; lscm, laser-scanning confocal microscope; alp,
alkaline phosphatase; pbs, phosphate-buffered saline; lscm, laser-scan-
ning confocal microscope.
5736 journal of biological chemistry
volume 282 • number 8 • february 23, 2007
a recent study, however, suggests that molecular pathways
shared by neurodegenerative disease and cancer may be con-
siderably overlapped than thought before. supporting this
notion, it has been recently shown that several familial pd-
causing factors are involved in the pathogenesis of cancer (21).
first, overexpression of the park2 parkin, which functions as
an e3 ligase in the ubiquitin-proteasome system (ups), resulted
in growth suppression in hepatocellular carcinoma cells (22).
furthermore, ectopic expression of parkin reportedly reduced
in vivo tumorigenesis in nude mice (23). second, the park5
ubiquitin c-terminal hydrolase light chain-1, which acts as a
de-ubiquitinating enzyme in ups, was shown to suppress pro-
liferation of a lung cancer cells (24). other evidence suggests
that ubiquitin c-terminal hydrolase light chain-1 might be
involved in the degradation of p27, a cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor (25). third, the park7 dj-1 was first identified as an
oncogene product that stimulated transformation of nih3t3
cells in coordination with ras (26). dj-1 was recently shown to
up-regulate the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase pathway through
inhibition of the tumor suppressor phosphatase pten, leading
to enhance survival of cancer (27).
in the same context one may wonder if ␣- and ␤-syn, the
central players in the pathogenesis of pd, might play some
important roles for the regulation of cancer. indeed, ␣-syn was
widely expressed in a variety of brain tumors, such as medullo-
blastoma, neuroblastoma, pineoblastoma, and ganglioma (28,
29). furthermore, both ␣- and ␤-syn were shown to be
expressed in the peripheral cancers, including ovarian and
breast cancers (30). although the role of syn proteins in the
pathogenesis of cancer is unclear, a limited number of studies
suggest that ␣-syn might be involved in the regulation of tumor
differentiation. supporting this possibility, ␣-syn was preferen-
tially expressed in brain tumors showing neuronal differentia-
tion (28). in cell cultures expression of ␣-syn was increased
during the hematopoietic differentiation of k562 myeloge-
nous leukemia cells (31). similarly, it was shown that ␣-syn
was up-regulated during neural differentiation of pheochro-
mocytoma pc12 cells (32). thus, distinct from the possible
role of ␥-syn for tumor metastasis, ␣-syn might be involved
in tumor differentiation.
accordingly, the main objective of the present study was to
determine whether ␣- and/or ␤-syn might regulate growth and
differentiation of cancer cells. for this purpose, ␣- and ␤-syn
were stably overexpressed in mg63 human osteosarcoma cells.
we found that compared with vector-transfected and ␤-syn-
overexpressing cells, ␣-syn-overexpressing cells exhibited dis-
tinct phenotype of differentiated osteoblastic cells. mechanis-
tically, ␣-syn may cause down-regulation of proteasome
activity, leading to accelerate cellular differentiation. further
studies revealed that down-regulation of proteasome activity by
␣-syn was regulated by alteration of various factors, including
pkc signaling activities and the autophagy-lysosomal pathway
in ␣-syn-overexpressing cells.
experimental procedures
reagent—chemical reagents include mg132 and lactacystin
(purchased from emd biosciences, san diego, ca), rotenone,
12-myristate 13-acetate (pma), 4␣-phorbol 12,13-didecanoate
␣-synuclein and tumor differentiation
(4␣pdd), leupeptin, chelerythrine chloride, and 3-methylad-
enine (3-ma) (obtained from sigma), and caspase i inhibitor
and iii inhibitors (ac-aavallpavllallap-yvad-cho,
ac-aavallpavllallap-devd-cho) (calbiochem) were
applied to cell cultures at indicated concentrations.
antibodies used are as follows. monoclonal antibodies, anti-
␣-syn (syn-1), anti-␤-syn, anti-pkc⑀, and anti-retinoblastoma
(rb) were purchased from bd biosciences. monoclonal anti-␤-
actin (ac-15) was obtained from sigma. monoclonal antibodies
anti-p21 and anti-cyclin b1, rabbit polyclonal antibodies anti-p15,
anti-cyclin d1, anti-cyclin-dependent kinase 4, and anti-phospho-
rylated rb, and goat polyclonal anti-osteocalcin antibody were
from santa cruz biotechnology (santa cruz, ca). monoclonal
anti-ubiquitin antibody was from chemicon (temecula, ca).
monoclonal anti-19 s proteasome s6a subunit antibody was from
biomol(plymouthmeeting,pa).rabbitpolyclonalanti-cathepsin
b was from calbiochem. rabbit polyclonal antibodies, anti-c-ter-
minal ␣-syn, and anti-␤-syn were previously described (33, 34).
alexa fluor 488-conjugated anti-goat secondary antibody, alexa
fluor 488-conjugated anti-rabbit secondary antibody, and alexa
fluor 555-conjugated anti-mouse secondary antibody were from
invitrogen.
cell cultures and transfection—mg63 and 293t cells were
both cultured in dulbecco’s modified eagle’s medium (high
glucose) containing 10% fetal calf serum (biowest, nuaille,
france) and 1% v/v penicillin/streptomycin (invitrogen) in a 5%
co2, 95% air atmosphere. mg63 cells exhibited both ␣- and
␤-syn transcripts by rt-pcr analysis, but their protein expres-
sions were hardly detectable by immunoblot analysis (data not
shown). for stable transfection, mg63 cells were transfected
with pcep4 expression vector (invitrogen) or pcep4 contain-
ing either human ␣- or ␤-syn cdna (34) using lipofectamine
2000 (invitrogen). after 2⬃3 weeks of incubation in the pres-
ence of 200 ␮g/ml hygromycin b (emd biosciences), the resist-
ant colonies of cells (⬃20) were isolated. these stable cell lines
were routinely maintained in the presence of 50 ␮g/ml hygro-
mycin b. 293t cells were transiently transfected with p-target
expression vector (promega, madison, wi) containing human
p21 cdna insert.3
reverse transcriptase (rt)-pcr—total rna was isolated
from cultured cells using the rna extraction buffer isogen
(nippongene,tokyo,japan).cdnawassynthesizedfrom2 ␮gof
total rna using the superscript iii first-strand synthesis system
(invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s instruction.
pcr amplification was carried out using taq pcr polymerase
(abgene, tokyo, japan), and the amplified products were resolved
by agarose gel electrophoresis. the following primers were used
for pcr. human ␣-syn (nm_000345): sense, 5⬘-atggat-
gtattcatgaaaggactttc-3⬘
(47–72-oligonucleotide
position), antisense, 5⬘-ggcttcaggttcgtagtcttga-
tac-3⬘ (the 442–466 oligonucleotide position); human ␤-syn
(bt006627): sense, 5⬘-atggacgtgttcatgaagggc-3⬘
(1–21-oligonucleotide position), antisense, 5⬘-ctacgcctc-
tggctcatactc-3⬘
(385–405-oligonucleotide position);
human cyclophilin a (nm_021130): sense, 5⬘-tactattag-
3 t. urano, unpublished information.
february 23, 2007 • volume 282 • number 8
journal of biological chemistry 5737
␣-synuclein and tumor differentiation
ccatggtcaac-3⬘ (62–81-oligonucleotide position), anti-
sense 5⬘-gtcttgccattcctggaccc-3⬘ (508–527-oligo-
nucleotide position); human liver/bone/kidney-type alkaline
phosphatase (alp) (ab011406): sense, 5⬘-gggggtggccg-
gaaatacat-3⬘ (834–853-oligonucleotide position), anti-
sense, 5⬘-gggggccagaccaaagatag-3⬘
(1357–1376-
oligonucleotide position); human osteocalcin (x51699): sense,
5⬘-atgagagccctcacactcctc-3⬘ (19–39-oligonucleo-
tide position), antisense, 5⬘-gccgtagaagcgccgata-
ggc-3⬘ (292–312-oligonucleotide position).
immunoblot and co-immunoprecipitation analyses—im-
munoblot analysis was performed as previously described (34).
briefly, cells were harvested and dissolved in lysis buffer (1%
nonidet p-40, 50 mm hepes, 150 mm nacl, 10% glycerol, 1.5
mm mgcl2, 1 mm egta, 100 mm sodium fluoride, and protease
inhibitor mixture (nakarai tesque, kyoto, japan)). protein
concentrations of the cell lysates were determined bio-rad pro-
tein assay reagent. cell extracts (10 ␮g) were then resolved by
sds-page (10 or 16%) and electroblotted onto nitrocellulose
membranes (ge healthcare) with caps buffer (ph 11.0). the
membranes were blocked with 3% bovine serum albumin (bsa)
in tris-buffered saline (tbs: 25 mm tris-hcl (ph 7.5), 150 mm
nacl) plus 0.2% tween 20 followed by an incubation with pri-
mary antibodies in tbs containing 3% bsa. after washing, the
membranes were further incubated with second antibody con-
jugated with horseradish peroxidase (ge healthcare) in tris-
buffered saline (1:10,000). finally, the target proteins were visu-
alized with the ecl plus system (ge healthcare). the intensity
of the band was measured using biomax 1d image analysis soft
ware (eastman kodak co.). in some experiments 293t cells
were transfected with p-target vector (promega) with or with-
out human p21 cdna insert, and cell extracts were used for
controls. recombinant human ␣- and ␤-syn were also used for
positive controls (9).
immunoprecipitation was
previously
described (35). briefly, cell extracts (200 ␮g) were preabsorbed
with protein g-sepharose (ge healthcare) for 1 h, and the pre-
cleared lysates were incubated with either syn-1 or mouse igg
control (each 1 ␮g) overnight at 4 °c followed by incubation
with protein g-sepharose. the immune complexes were then
washed three times with the lysis buffer. the samples were then
heated in the sds sample buffer for 5 min and subjected to
immunoblotting.
immunofluorescence study—cells were seeded onto poly-l-
lysine-coated glass coverslips, grown to 70% confluence, fixed
in 4% paraformaldehyde for 30 min and pretreated with 0.1%
triton x-100 in phosphate-buffered saline (pbs) for 20 min.
fixed cells were blocked with pbs containing 3% goat serum
and 5% bovine serum albumin at room temperature. for stain-
ing, cells were incubated overnight at 4 °c with primary anti-
body (or antibodies for double staining). after washing, cells
were incubated with alexa fluor-conjugated secondary anti-
body (or antibodies for double staining) (invitrogen) for 1 h at
room temperature. control experiments included immuno-
staining in the absence of primary antibody. coverslips were
air-dried, mounted on slides with gel/mount (biomeda corp.,
foster city, ca), and imaged with the laser-scanning confocal
microscope (lscm) (olympus, fv1000, tokyo, japan).
performed
as
cell cycle analysis using flow cytometry—cells seeded at
1 ⫻ 105 cells in 6-well cell culture plates were incubated under
low serum (0.1%) conditions for 24 h, treated with 10% serum
for 6, 12, 18, 24, and 96 h, and harvested using trypsin-edta.
after washing with pbs, cells were fixed by ice-cold ethanol to
final concentration of 70%. the cells were then resuspended in
pbs containing 0.5 mg/ml rnasea (nakarai tesque), incu-
bated for 30 min at 37 °c, and followed by staining with pro-
pidium iodide (10 ␮g/ml) for 10 min at room temperature.
before flow cytometry analysis, the stained cells were filtrated
with nylon mesh. the fluorescence signals of 2 ⫻ 104 cells were
recorded by epics altra (beckman coulter, fullerton, ca).
the distribution of cell cycle phase was analyzed by multicycle
software (phoenix flow systems, san diego, ca).
measurement of alp activity—cellular activities of alp
were determined as described previously with some modifica-
tions (36). briefly, cells were grown until confluency under the
10% serum conditions in 6-well cell culture plates. cells were
then washed twice, harvested into pbs, and sonicated by ultra-
sonic disruptor (tomy, tokyo, japan) for 20 s. after centrifu-
gation of the cell preparations at 15,000 rpm for 10 min, the
supernatants were recovered and assessed for protein concen-
tration. the supernatants (10 ␮g) were then incubated in the
alp assay buffer containing 10 mm p-nitrophenyl phosphate
(sigma), 100 mm glycine, 1 mm zncl2, and 1 mm mgcl2 (ph
10.4). after 90 min of incubation at 37 °c, alp activity was
determined by monitoring the amount of released p-nitrophe-
nol at 415 nm. dissolved p-nitrophenol in assay buffer was used
to establish the standard for quantification. the released p-ni-
trophenol was adjusted by the amount of protein and described
as nmol/min/mg of protein.
increased levels of the cellular alp activities were further
confirmed by direct stain of the cells. the cells reached conflu-
ency were fixed with 70% ethanol, washed twice with tris-buff-
ered saline, and incubated with nitro blue tetrazolium chloride/
5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl phosphate p-toluidine salt alp
substrate solution (roche applied science) for 2 h. the visual-
ized image was then photographed.
mineralization assay—mineralization of mg63 cells was
performed as previously described (36) with some modifica-
tions. briefly, cells were grown until confluency under the 10%
serum conditions in 24-well cell culture plates. the cells were
further incubated in ␣-minimal essential medium (invitrogen)
plus 10% serum in the presence of 10 mm ␤-glycerophosphate
(sigma) and 50 ␮g/ml ascorbic acid with or without the addi-
tion of various chemical reagents. the media were regularly
changed twice a week. after 4 weeks, cells were evaluated for
the extent of matrix mineralization by either alizarin red stain-
ing or von kossa staining. for alizarin red staining, the cells
were fixed with 70% ethanol for 30 min at room temperature.
then the cells were incubated with 40 mm alizarin red-s
(sigma) for 10 min and washed 4 times with distilled water. the
visualized image was photographed. for von kossa staining, the
cells were fixed with 10% neutralized formaldehyde for 30 min
at room temperature. the fixed cells were incubated with 5%
silver nitrate for 5 min under the exposure to the sunlight. the
reaction was stopped by the addition of 5% sodium thiosulfate.
5738 journal of biological chemistry
volume 282 • number 8 • february 23, 2007
the stained cells were washed four times with distilled water
and imaged with microscope.
evaluation of proteasome and cathepsin b activity—meas-
urement of proteasome and cathepsin b activity was done as
previously described with modifications (37). briefly, cells
reaching confluency in 6-well cell culture plates were incubated
under the low serum (0.1%) conditions for 24 h and treated with
10% serum with or without treatment of various reagents. after
the indicated times (0, 6, or 12 h), the cells were harvested in
buffer containing 50 mm hepes (ph 7.4), 10 mm edta, and 10
mm nacl, subjected to freezing and thawing to rapture cell
membranous structures, and then centrifuged at 15,000 rpm
for 10 min. for the measurement of proteasome activity, 10 ␮g
of the supernatants were incubated in assay buffer containing
50 mm hepes (ph 7.4), 10 mm edta, 10 mm nacl, and 40 ␮m
benzyloxycarbonyl-leu-leu-glu-amidomethylcoumarin flu-
orogenic proteasome substrate (chemicon). for cathepsin b
activity, 10 ␮g of the supernatants were incubated in buffer
containing 50 mm hepes (ph 6.0), 10 mm edta, 10 mm nacl,
and 40 ␮m benzyloxycarbonyl-arg-arg-amidomethylcouma-
rin fluorogenic cathepsin b substrate (chemicon). these
enzyme activities were assayed by continuous recording of the
fluorescence activity released from fluorogenic substrate using
berthold mithras lb940 microplate reader (berthold, bad
wildbad, germany) for 1 h at 37 °c (excitation, 380 nm; emis-
sion, 460 nm), and the reaction rate was analyzed. these
enzyme activities were described as arbitrary unit/min/mg of
protein.
evaluation of pkc activity—pkc activity was determined
using peptag nonradioactive pkc assay kit (promega) accord-
ing to the manufacture’s instruction. briefly, cells reaching con-
fluency in 6-well cell culture plates were treated with or without
pma for 20 min and harvested in extraction buffer (25 mm
tris-hcl (ph 7.4), 0.5 mm edta, 0.5 mm egta, 10 mm ␤-mer-
captoethanol, 100 mm phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, and pro-
tease inhibitor mixture (nakarai tesque)). cell extracts were
then sonicated by ultrasonic disruptor (tomy) for 20 s and
centrifuged at 15,000 rpm for 15 min. the supernatants were
used for the assay. the reaction was performed at 30 °c for 30
min in assay solution including, peptag c1 peptide (0.4 ␮g/␮l)
and 5 ␮g of protein sample. the samples were separated on the
0.8% agarose gel and visualized on a transilluminator. the
intensity of fluorescence of the phosphorylated peptides were
quantified using biomax 1d image analysis soft ware (kodak).
electron microscopy—electron microscopy analysis was per-
formed as previously described with minor modifications (38).
briefly, cells were harvested using trypsin-edta and fixed by
2.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 m sodium cacodylate buffer at 4 °c
for 2 h. after centrifugation, cells were washed with 0.1 m
sodium cacodylate buffer 3 times. cell pellets were obtained by
centrifuge, post-fixed in 1% osmium tetroxide and 1% potas-
sium ferrocyanide at room temperature for 2 h, and processed
for embedding in quetol 812 (nisshin em, tokyo, japan).
ultrathin sections were stained with uranyl acetate and lead
nitrate and observed by a hitachi h-7500 electron microscope.
statistical analysis—all values in the figures are expressed as
means ⫾ s.d. to determine statistical significance, the values
␣-synuclein and tumor differentiation
were compared by two group t tests. the differences were con-
sidered as significant if p values were less than 0.05.
results
overexpression of syn in mg63 osteosarcoma cells—to
investigate the effect of syn on growth and differentiation of
tumor cells, mg63 osteosarcoma cells were stably transfected
with ␣- or ␤-syn cdna. three high expressors of ␣-syn (clones
␣1, ␣5, and ␣15) and ␤-syn (clones ␤5, ␤8, and ␤13) were
selected on the basis of immunoblot analysis together with
empty vector-transfected cells (clones v2, v5, and v10) (fig. 1a).
for the majority of experiments, clone ␣1, the high expresser of
␣-syn, and clones ␤5 and v2 were used. immunoblot analysis
also showed that the immunoreactivities of both ␣- and ␤-syn
were almost exclusively those of their monomers (fig. 1a). to
further analyze expression and distribution of syn proteins,
double immunolabeling/lscm was performed using at least
two antibodies for each syn (fig. 1b). the immunoreactivity of
␣-syn in ␣-syn-overexpressing cells (␣1) was diffuse in the cell
bodies as detected by both monoclonal syn-1 and polyclonal
c-terminal antibodies (a and b). immunoreactivity of ␤-syn in
␤-syn-overexpressing cells (␤5) was also localized diffusely in
the cell bodies by monoclonal anti-␤-syn antibody (e) but was
detected with a shift to perinuclear regions by polyclonal anti-
␤-syn antibody (f). in none of these cases, inclusion bodies were
detected. notably, expression levels of ␣-syn were heterogene-
ous (c), and similar patterns were consistently observed in all
the three clones of ␣-syn-overexpressing cells (data not shown).
by contrast, immunoreactivities of ␤-syn were homogeneous in
␤-syn-overexpressing cells (g). no immunoreactivities of syn
proteins were detected in vector-transfected cells (v2) (d and h).
to determine whether cell proliferation was affected by over-
expression of syn, the stable clones were evaluated for their cell
growth rates. the doubling times of cells in log phase of growth
under 10% serum conditions were 20–24 h for ␣-syn-overex-
pressing cells and 14–17.5 h for both ␤-syn-overexpressing and
vector-transfected cells (data not shown). cells were then incu-
bated under the low serum (0.1%) for 24 h to synchronize at g1
in cell cycle and then added with 10% serum followed by count-
ing of cell numbers at the indicated times. the result showed
that that the average cell numbers of ␣-syn-overexpressing cells
at day 4 were significantly decreased compared with both
␤-syn-overexpressing and vector-transfected cells (fig. 1c).
to determine whether decreased cell proliferation of ␣-syn-
overexpressing cells is due to alteration of cell cycle profile, cell
cycle analysis was performed using flow cytometry at varying
time periods (0, 6, 12, 18, 24, and 96 h) after the addition of 10%
serum to serum-deprived cells. the result showed that com-
pared with both ␤-syn-overexpressing and vector-transfected
cells, ␣-syn cells in g0/g1 phases were significantly increased
(p ⬍ 0.05), whereas those in both s and g2/m phase were
decreased at 24 and 96 h (p ⬍ 0.05) (fig. 1d). essentially similar
results were observed at 96 h. however, compared with the
profile at 24 h, there were more cells in g0/g1 phase, fewer cells
in s phase, and more cells in g2/m at 96 h. one possible reason
for the difference between 24 and 96 h could be that at 24 h
many cells might have not yet reached g2/m phase. further-
more, a relatively high ratio of cells in g0/g1 phase at 96 h could
february 23, 2007 • volume 282 • number 8
journal of biological chemistry 5739
␣-synuclein and tumor differentiation
figure 1. analysis of syn expression in transfected mg63 osteosarcoma cells. a, immunoblot analysis of syn proteins. cell extracts were analyzed by immuno-
blotting using syn-1 (upper panel), anti-␤-syn monoclonal antibody (middle panel), and anti-actin antibody (lower panel). three vector-transfected clones (v2, v5, v10,
lanes 1–3), three high expresser clones for ␣-syn (␣1, ␣5, ␣15, lanes 4–6), and ␤-syn (␤5, ␤8, ␤13, lanes 7–9) are shown. recombinant ␣- and ␤-syn proteins were used
as positive controls (lanes 10 and 11). b, immunofluorescence/lscm analysis of syn expression. ␣-syn-overexpressing cells (␣1) (a–c), ␤-syn-overexpressing cells (␤5)
(e–g), and vector-transfected cells (v2) (d and h) were immunostained with antibodies against ␣-syn (green, a–d), ␤-syn (green, e–h), and actin (red, c, d, g, and h)
followed by observation by lscm. ␣-syn was diffusely distributed in the cell bodies with a slight shift to cell membrane as detected by both syn-1 (a) and polyclonal
c-terminal antibody (b). ␤-syn was similarly detected in the cell bodies by monoclonal anti-␤-syn antibody (e), but strong stains of perinuclear regions were observed
by polyclonal anti-␤-syn antibody (f). immunoreactivities of ␣-syn were heterogeneous (c), whereas those of ␤-syn were almost even in all cell populations (g). no
immunoreactivities of syn proteins were detected in vector-transfected cells (d and h). bars represent either 20 ␮m for high magnification (a, b, e, and f) or 50 ␮m for
low magnification (c, d, g, and h). c, evaluation of cell proliferation. cells (v2, v5, v10, ␣1, ␣5, ␣15, ␤5, ␤8, and ␤13) were incubated at 1 ⫻ 105 cells/well in the 6-well plates
under the low serum (0.1%) conditions for 24 h to synchronize. cells were then treated with 10% serum, and cell numbers were counted at 96 h. open circles represent
the group mean values. data shown are the mean ⫾ s.d. (n ⫽ 3). **, p ⬍ 0.01. d, flow cytometry for cell cycle analysis. cells were prepared as described in c, and dna
contents were analyzed at the indicated times (0, 6, 12, 18, 24, and 96 h) after serum stimulation. the upper figures are a typical cell cycle profile at 24 h for v2, ␣1, and
␤5.thexaxisrepresentsthefluorescentintensitiesproportionaltotheamountofdna,whereastheyaxisindicatesthecellnumber.thelowercolumnfiguresshowthat
g0/g1 phases at 24 and 96 h in ␣-syn cells were significantly increased, whereas those in both s and g2/m phase were decreased compared with both ␤-syn-
overexpressing and vector-transfected cells. data presented are the mean ⫾ s.d. of triple determinations. *, p ⬍ 0.05.
5740 journal of biological chemistry
volume 282 • number 8 • february 23, 2007
␣-synuclein and tumor differentiation
expressing cells but not in other
cell types (fig. 2c). furthermore,
rt-pcr analysis revealed that up-
regulation of alp and osteocalcin in
␣-syn-overexpressed cells might be
attributed to increased transcrip-
tion (fig. 2d). to further corrobo-
rate that cellular differentiation is
accelerated in ␣-syn-overexpress-
ing cells, we evaluated formation of
mineral deposition in the matrix
that may mimic the calcification by
osteoblasts in vivo. for this purpose,
cells were incubated in the presence
of ␤-glycerophosphate and ascorbic
acid for 4 weeks followed by staining
with alizarin red to assess calcium
incorporation. the result showed
that mineralization was
clearly
detectable in ␣-syn-overexpressing
cells but not in ␤-syn-overexpress-
ing nor vector-transfected cells (fig.
2e). similar results were obtained
by von kossa staining for the assess-
ment of bone nodule formation (fig.
2e). taken together, ␣-syn-overex-
pressing cells specifically exhibited
a differentiated phenotype com-
pared with both ␤-syn-overexpress-
ing and vector-transfected cells.
figure 2. up-regulation of the expression of osteoblastic differentiation markers in ␣-syn-overexpres-
sing mg63 cells. a, measurement of alp activity. cells (v2, v5, v10, ␣1, ␣5, ␣15, ␤5, ␤8, and ␤13) under the
confluent conditions were harvested, and cell extracts were incubated with p-nitrophenyl phosphate at 37 °c
for 90 min. the amount of released nitrophenol was monitored by absorbance at 415 nm. ␣-syn-overexpress-
ing cells (␣1) showed significantly higher alp activity compared with other cell types (v2 and ␤5). data shown
are mean ⫾ s.d. (n ⫽ 5). *, p ⬍ 0.05; **, p ⬍ 0.01. b, evaluation of alp activity by staining. cells (v2, ␣1, and ␤5)
were stained with nitro blue tetrazolium chloride/5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl phosphate solution and photo-
graphed. c, immunostaining of osteocalsin. cells (v2, ␣1, and ␤5) were immunostained with anti-osteocalsin
antibody followed by observation with lscm. the bar represents 50 ␮m. d, rt-pcr analysis of alp and osteo-
calcin mrnas. cyclophilin mrna was used as an internal control. e, in vitro mineralization assay. cells (v2, v5,
v10, ␣1, ␣5, ␣15, ␤5, ␤8, and ␤13) were seeded onto 24-well cell culture plates (1 ⫻ 105 cells/ml) and main-
tained in ␣-minimal essential medium containing 10 mm ␤-glycerophosphate and 50 ␮g/ml ascorbic acid for 4
weeks. matrix mineralization was evaluated by either alizarin red staining (middle panel) or von kossa staining
(right panel). each clone number is indicated in the squire matrix (left panel). please note that the strongest
staining was observed in clone ␣1, the highest ␣-syn expresser.
be due to the decreased nutrients in the culture medium after
long time culture. taken together, these results suggested that
overexpression of ␣-syn, but not of ␤-syn, suppressed cell pro-
liferation in mg63 osteosarcoma cells.
␣-syn-overexpressing mg63 cells exhibit enhanced differ-
entiation phenotype—based on the apparent decrease of
growth rates and enhanced g0/g1 phases in cell cycle in ␣-syn-
overexpressing mg63 cells compared with ␤-syn-overexpress-
ing and vector-transfected cells, we speculated that the former
cells might be shifted to cellular differentiation.
to test this possibility, we evaluated alp since this molecule
had been widely used as a marker for osteoblastic differentia-
tion. as we suspected, all three clones of ␣-syn-overexpressing
cells displayed significantly higher activity of alp compared
with both ␤-syn-overexpressing and vector-transfected cells
(fig. 2a). activation of alp was also assessed by direct stain of
cells using nitro blue tetrazolium chloride/5-bromo-4-chloro-
3-indolyl phosphate as substrate. the result showed that the
intensity of the staining in ␣-syn-overexpressing cells was
much stronger than those of ␤-syn-overexpressing and vector-
transfected cells (fig. 2b). next, we analyzed expression of
osteocalcin, another marker for osteoblastic differentiation.
the immunofluorescence/lscm study showed that immuno-
reactivity of osteocalcin was strongly observed in ␣-syn-over-
alteration of g1 cell cycle regu-
lators and decreased proteasome
activity
in ␣-syn-overexpressing
mg63 cells—because prolonged
g1 period in cell cycle is prerequisite for cell entry into g0 and
further differentiation, it was predicted that expressions and
activities of various g1 cell cycle regulators might be altered in
␣-syn-overexpressing cells.
to test this possibility, cells were incubated under the low
serum (0.1%) conditions for 24 h to synchronize at g1 followed
by 10% serum treatment. cells were then harvested, and
expression of various cell cycle regulators were analyzed at the
indicated times (fig. 3a). notably, expression of the cyclin-de-
pendent kinase inhibitor p21, one of the key molecules which
negatively regulate cell cycle progression from g1 to s phase,
was significantly up-regulated in ␣-syn-overexpressing cells. in
these cells p21 was constitutively expressed without serum
stimulation and was further increased in response to serum,
reaching the maximum around 6- 12 h followed by gradual
decrease. by contrast, in vector-transfected cells expression of
p21 was transiently up-regulated at 6 h and immediately
decreased. consistent with this, phosphorylation of rb protein
was compromised in ␣-syn-expressing cells compared with
vector-transfected cells. furthermore, cyclin b1, a marker for
g2/m phase, was up-regulated earlier in vector-transfected
cells than in ␣-syn-overexpressing cells. as for other cyclin-de-
pendent kinase inhibitors, p15 level was slightly elevated at 24-
and 48-h time points, whereas expression of p27 was not up-
february 23, 2007 • volume 282 • number 8
journal of biological chemistry 5741
␣-synuclein and tumor differentiation
figure 3. altered expression of cell cycle regulators and decrease of proteasome activity in ␣-syn-
overexpressing mg63 cells. a, immunoblot analysis of cell cycle regulators. vector-transfected (v2) and
␣-syn-overexpressing cells (␣1) were incubated under the low serum (0.1%) conditions for 24 h to synchronize
and then treated with 10% serum for the indicated times (6, 12, 24, and 48 h). cells were then harvested, and cell
lysates were analyzed by immunoblotting with anti-p21, rb, phospho rb, cyclin (cyc) b, cyclin d1, cyclin-de-
pendent kinase (cdk4), p15, and ubiquitin. b, evaluation of the stability of p21 protein by cycloheximide
experiments. the synchronized cells (v2 and ␣1) were treated with 10% serum with or without cycloheximide
(chx) for the indicated times (1, 2, and 4 h), and cell lysates were analyzed by immunoblotting (upper panel).
each band was quantified using biomax 1d image analysis soft ware (lower panel). data shown are the mean ⫾
s.d. similar results were obtained by three independent experiments. c, measurement of proteasome activity.
cells (v2, ␣1, and ␤5) were incubated under the low serum (0.1%) conditions for 24 h and then treated with 10%
serum for the indicated times (6 and 12 h). to evaluate proteasome activity, cell extracts (10 ␮g) were incubated
with fluorogenic substrate (benzyloxycarbonyl-leu-leu-glu-amidomethylcoumarin) at 37 °c. released fluo-
rescence (excitation 380 nm, emission 460 nm) was monitored by 5 min intervals up to 60 min. the fluorogenic
value at each time point was plotted, and the slope was calculated. data shown are the mean ⫾ s.d. (n ⫽ 3). *,
p ⬍ 0.05; **, p ⬍ 0.01. d, immunoblot analysis of ubiquitylated proteins. vector-transfected (v2) and ␣-syn-
overexpressing cells (␣1) were prepared as described in a and analyzed by immunoblotting using anti-ubiq-
uitin antibody. both types of cells treated with lactacystin for 6 h were included as positive controls.
ties of ␣-syn-overexpressing cells
were decreased to ⬃50% of those of
vector-transfected cells, whereas
those of ␤-syn-overexpressing cells
were little affected (fig. 3c). under
the same experimental conditions,
immunoreactivities of polyubiqui-
tylated proteins were significantly
stronger in ␣-syn-overexpressing
cells compared with those in vector-
transfected and ␤-syn-overexpress-
ing cells (fig. 3d and data not
shown). taken together, expression
of cell cycle regulators such as p21
and phosphorylated rb were altered
in ␣-syn-overexpressing
cells,
which might be attributed to the
decreased proteasome activity.
proteasome inhibitors stimulate
differentiation of wild-type mg63
cells—if suppression of proteasome
activity by ␣-syn plays a causative
role for stimulation of differentia-
tion in mg63 osteosarcoma cells,
then it is possible that down-regula-
tion of proteasome activity by other
experimental
procedures might
similarly stimulate differentiation in
these cells.
regulated in ␣-syn-overexpressing cells compared with vector-
transfected cells (fig. 3a and data not shown). expression of
other cell cycle regulators such as cyclin d1 and cyclin-depend-
ent kinase 4 were not much different between both cell types.
similar expression patterns of p21 and phosphorylated rb were
observed between ␤-syn-overexpressing cells and vector-trans-
fected cells (data not shown).
next, to determine whether up-regulation of p21 expression
was due to the stabilization of p21 protein in ␣-syn-overex-
pressing cells, these cells were treated with cycloheximide to
inhibit protein synthesis 6 h after serum stimulation. under
these conditions, expression levels of p21 protein quickly
decreased within 2 h of treatment in vector-transfected cells,
whereas expression levels in ␣-syn-overexpressing cells took
longer to detect (fig. 3b). under the same experimental condi-
tions, p21 mrna was evaluated by real time pcr. however, no
significant differences were observed between ␣-syn-overex-
pressing and vector-transfected cells (data not shown).
to further determine whether increased stability of p21 was
due to compromised degradation by ups in ␣-syn-overex-
pressing cells, syn-transfected cells were analyzed for protea-
some activities. the result showed that the proteasome activi-
to test this possibility, wild-type
mg63 cells were treated with protea-
some inhibitors,
including mg132
andlactacystinfollowedbyevaluation
of cellular differentiation. immuno-
blotanalysisrevealedthatadministra-
tion of these reagents at 10 ␮m clearly
up-regulated p21 expression at 12 h (fig. 4a). under the same
experimental conditions, alp activity was significantly up-reg-
ulated, and immunoreactivity of osteocalcin became detectable
(fig. 4b and data not shown). in addition, the expression of alp
and osteocalcin mrna was up-regulated in lactacystin-treated
cells (fig. 4c). furthermore, cells were induced to form matrix
mineralization with lower concentrations of proteasome inhib-
itors (0.01–0.1 ␮m for mg132 and 0.1–1.0 ␮m for lactacystin)
in long-term cultures. high concentration (10 ␮m) treatment of
these reagents caused prominent cell death within 48 h (data
not shown). by contrast, sublethal concentrations (0.01–0.1
␮m) of rotenone, an inhibitor of mitochondria complex i,
caspase i, and iii inhibitors (0.1–1.0 ␮m), and leupeptin (1–10
␮m) had little effect on cellular differentiation (fig. 4d). taken
together, treatment of wild-type mg63 cells with proteasome
inhibitors resulted in stimulation of cellular differentiation.
down-regulation of pkc activity in ␣-syn-overexpressing
mg63 cells—our hypothesis was that alteration of signal
transduction might be involved in the suppression of protea-
some activity in ␣-syn-overexpressing cells. in this regard we
especially focused on the potential role of pkc since it was
recently shown that treatment of skeletal muscle by phorbol
5742 journal of biological chemistry
volume 282 • number 8 • february 23, 2007
␣-synuclein and tumor differentiation
finally,
to determine whether
pkc activity was compromised in
␣-syn-overexpressing cells, the syn-
transfected cells were treated with
or without pma and analyzed for
their pkc activities (fig. 5c). the
result
showed that proteasome
activities of ␣-syn-overexpressing
cells were significantly lower than
those of ␤-syn-overexpressing and
vector-transfected cells.
impor-
tantly, pma treatment of ␣-syn-
overexpressing cells restored the
pkc activity to the basal
levels
of those in other cell types. taken
together,
these results suggested
that ␣-syn might directly suppress
the pkc activity in ␣-syn-overex-
pressing cells.
because previous studies sug-
gested an alternative possibility that
␣-syn bound with s6 subunit of 19 s
proteasome, leading to interference
with proteasome functions (41–43),
we investigated the association of
␣-syn with s6a. the results of co-
immunoprecipitation experiment
confirmed the association of these
molecules (fig. 5a). double immu-
nolabeling/lscm showed
that
overlapping of the immunoreactivi-
ties of these molecules was partially
detected in the cell bodies, since s6a
was considerably localized in the
nucleus (fig. 5b).
figure 4. proteasome inhibitors induce cellular differentiation in wild-type mg63 cells. wild-type mg63
were incubated under the low serum (0.1%) conditions for 24 h and then treated with 10% serum in the
presence of either mg132 or lactacystin. a, immunoblot analysis of p21. cells were treated with various con-
centrations of either mg132 (0, 0.1, 1.0, 10 ␮m, lanes 3– 6) or lactacystin (0, 1.0, 10, 20 ␮m, lanes 7–10) and
harvested at 12 h. cell lysates were analyzed by immunoblotting using anti-p21 antibody. extracts of 293t cells
transfected with or without p21 expression vector are shown as controls (lanes 1 and 2). b, measurement of alp
activity. cells were treated with various concentrations (0, 10, 20 ␮m) of lactacystin for 12 h. to evaluate alp
activity, cell extracts were incubated with p-nitrophenyl phosphate at 37 °c for 90 min. the amount of released
nitrophenol was monitored by the absorbance at 415 nm. data shown in the left panel are the mean ⫾ s.d. (n ⫽
3). *, p ⬍ 0.05; **, p ⬍ 0.01. c, rt-pcr analysis of alp and osteocalcin mrnas. cells were treated with lactacystin
(10 ␮m) for 24 h. cyclophilin mrna was used as an internal control. d, in vitro mineralization assay. cells were
treated with various reagents, including mg132 (0, 0.01, 0.1 ␮m), lactacystin (0, 0.1, 1.0 ␮m), rotenone (0, 0.1, 0.1
␮m), caspase i inhibitor (0, 0.1, 1.0 ␮m), caspase iii inhibitor (0, 0.1, 1.0 ␮m), and leupeptin (0, 1, 10 ␮m) for 4 weeks.
matrix mineralization was evaluated by alizarin red staining. please note that positive staining was observed for
cells treated with proteasome inhibitors. acridine orange/ethidium bromide staining revealed that cells were
alive during mineralization (not shown).
ester resulted in stimulation of proteasome activity (39) and it
was previously shown that ␣-syn bound with pkc and down-
regulated the activity of pkc in ␣-syn overexpressing neuro-
blastoma cells (40).
to determine whether ␣-syn associates with pkc, a co-im-
munoprecipitation experiment was performed (fig. 5a). cell
extracts of ␣-syn-overexpressing cells were immunoprecipi-
tated with syn-1 followed by immunoblotting analysis with
mouse anti- pkc⑀antibody. in agreement with a previous study
by ostrerova et al. (40), the result showed that pkc⑀was spe-
cifically co-immunoprecipitated with ␣-syn.
next, to further determine whether ␣-syn colocalize with
pkc, cells were double-immunolabeled with anti-␣-syn rabbit
polyclonal antibody and anti-pkc⑀antibody followed by obser-
vation with lscm. as shown in fig. 5b, immunoreactivities of
␣-syn and pkc⑀ considerably overlapped in the cytoplasm of
␣-syn-overexpressing cells. we observed that pkc⑀and pkc␭
were highly expressed in addition to moderate expression of
other pkc family of peptides in mg63 cells (data not shown).
similar results were obtained by both co-immunoprecipitation
and double immunolabeling/lscm studies for pkc␭(data not
shown).
phorbol ester treatment of ␣-
syn-overexpressing mg63 cells restores proteasome activity
and suppresses cellular differentiation—if suppression of
pkc activity by ␣-syn is causative for down-regulation of
proteasome activity and enhanced differentiation in ␣-syn-
overexpressing cells, then stimulation of pkc might restore
the proteasome activity and abrogate cellular differentiation
in these cells.
accordingly, ␣-syn-overexpressing cells were treated with
phorbol ester followed by evaluation of proteasome activity.
the results showed that the compromised activity of protea-
some in ␣-syn-overexpressing cells was significantly improved
by treatment with pma both at 10 and 50 nm but not with an
inactive analogue 4␣pdd (fig. 6a). on the other hand,
although proteasome activity of vector-transfected cells was
increased by treatment with 50 nm pma, there were little
effects observed at 10 nm pma (fig. 6a). thus, ␣-syn-overex-
pressing cells responded more sensitively to pma treatment,
suggesting the effect of pma on proteasome was more specific
for ␣-syn-overexpressing cells, which showed decreased pro-
teasome activity. the stimulatory effects of pma on the pro-
teasome activity in ␣-syn-overexpressing cells reached the
maximum at 50 nm (data not shown) and were completely abro-
february 23, 2007 • volume 282 • number 8
journal of biological chemistry 5743
␣-synuclein and tumor differentiation
figure 6. phorbol ester treatment restores proteasome activity and
abrogates differentiation in ␣-syn-overexpressing mg63 cells. a, meas-
urement of proteasome activity. vector-transfected (v2) and ␣-syn-overex-
pressing cells (␣1) were incubated under the low serum (0.1%) conditions for
24 h and then treated with 10% serum in the presence of any of vehicle (0.1%
me2so (dmso)), pma (10 and 50 nm), 4␣pdd (50 nm), chelerythrine chloride
(pkc inhibitor, 50 nm), or pma (50 nm) plus chelerythrine chloride (50 nm). cell
extracts (5 ␮g) were harvested at 12 h after treatment and incubated with
fluorogenic proteasome substrate at 37 °c. released fluorescence (excitation,
380 nm; emission, 460 nm) was monitored each 5 min up to 60 min. fluoro-
genic intensity of each time point was plotted, and the slope was calculated.
data shown are the mean ⫾ s.d. (n ⫽ 3). **, p ⬍ 0.01. b, measurement of alp
activity. vector-transfected (v2) and ␣-syn-overexpressing cells (␣1) were
treated as described in a. cell extracts at 12 h treatment were incubated with
p-nitrophenyl phosphate at 37 °c for 90 min. the amount of released nitro-
phenol was monitored by the absorbance at 415 nm. data shown are the
mean ⫾ s.d. (n ⫽ 3). *, p ⬍ 0.05; **, p ⬍ 0.01. c, in vitro mineralization assay.
␣-syn-overexpressing cells (␣1) were treated with either pma or 4␣pdd at
the indicated concentrations (0, 10, 20, 50 nm). matrix mineralization was then
evaluated by alizarin red staining. please note that the staining was mitigated
by pma but not by 4␣pdd. similar results were obtained by three independ-
ent experiments.
treatment with either vehicle or inactive 4␣pdd, pma effi-
ciently reduced alp activity in ␣-syn-overexpressing cells (fig.
6b). immunoreactivity of osteocalcin was also decreased by
pma but not by 4␣pdd in these cells (data not shown). finally,
it was confirmed that pma, but not 4␣pdd, significantly
reduced matrix mineralization in ␣-syn-overexpressing cells as
demonstrated by decreased stains of alizarin red (fig. 6c).
taken together, pma treatment of ␣-syn-overexpressing cells
restored proteasome activity and abrogation of cellular differ-
entiation in these cells.
up-regulation of lysosomal activity in ␣-syn-overexpressing
mg63 cells—because a recent study has shown that autoph-
agy-lysosomal pathway may play an important role for aggre-
figure 5. association of ␣-syn with pkc and down-regulation of pkc
activity in ␣-syn-overexpressing mg63 cells. a, coimmunoprecipitation
(ip) of ␣-syn with either pkc⑀(upper) or s6a (middle). vector-transfected (v2)
and ␣-syn-overexpressing cells (␣1) were harvested, and cell extracts (300
␮g) were immunoprecipitated with anti-␣-syn antibody or mouse igg control
followed by immunoblotting (ib)with either anti-pkc⑀(upper), anti-s6a (mid-
dle), or syn-1 (low). cell extracts (5% of input) were used as positive controls.
b, immunofluorescence/lscm of ␣-syn association with either pkc⑀or s6a in
␣-syn-overexpressing cells. cells (␣1) were doubly stained with anti-␣-syn
antibody (green) and either anti-pkc⑀ or s6a (red) and observed by lscm.
please note that ␣-syn (red) and pkc⑀(green) were well co-localized in the cell
bodies (c). bars represent 50 ␮m. c, measurement of pkc activity. exponen-
tially growing cells (v2, ␣1, and ␤5) were treated with or without pma for 20
min, and cell extracts (10 ␮g) were analyzed for pkc activity using fluorogenic
peptides as substrates as described under “experimental procedures.” data
shown are the mean ⫾ s.d. (n ⫽ 3). *, p ⬍ 0.05; **, p ⬍ 0.01. dmso, dimethyl
sulfoxide.
gated in the presence of pkc inhibitor, chelerythrine chloride
(fig. 6a), implying that pma stimulated proteasome activity
through phosphorylation but not through depletion of pkc.
next, to determine whether pkc stimulation of proteasome
activity modifies differentiation in ␣-syn-overexpressing cells,
cellular differentiation markers were analyzed. compared with
5744 journal of biological chemistry
volume 282 • number 8 • february 23, 2007
gate-prone proteins, including ␣-syn and huntingtin (44), it is
reasonable to speculate that down-regulation of proteasome
activity by ␣-syn might be further modulated by this pathway.
in this context we wondered if lysosomal activity might be
altered due to increased level of ␣-syn expression in ␣-syn-
overexpressing cells. to test this hypothesis, cysteine protease
cathepsin b, one of the major protease in lysosome, was eval-
uated. the results showed that cathepsin b was significantly
up-regulated in ␣-syn-overexpressing cells compared with
vector-transfected and ␤-syn-overexpressing cells (fig. 7a).
consistent with this, expression of cathepsin b was up-reg-
ulated at protein and mrna levels in ␣-syn-overexpressing
cells (fig. 7b, data not shown). to investigate the ultrastruc-
ture of lysosome, an electron microscopic study was per-
formed. the results revealed extensive lysosomal pathology,
such as autolysosome and myelinosome, in ␣-syn-overex-
pressing cells (fig. 7c, a, c, e, and f). on the contrary, fewer
lysosomes were observed in vector-transfected and ␤-syn-
overexpressing cells (fig. 7c, b and d). taken together, these
results suggested that lysosomal activity was up-regulated in
␣-syn-overexpressing cells.
autophagy-lysosomal inhibitor treatment results in down-
regulation of proteasome activity, leading to acceleration of
cellular differentiation in ␣-syn-overexpressing mg63 cells—
if up-regulation of lysosomal activity in ␣-syn-overexpressing
cells may reflect the compensatory mechanism against the
increased level of ␣-syn, then suppression of autophagy-lysoso-
mal pathways may result in compromised clearance of ␣-syn,
leading to decrease proteasome activity and accelerate cellular
differentiation in those cells.
we first evaluated expression levels of ␣- and ␤-syn proteins
in the presence of autophagy-lysosomal inhibitors. the results
of immunoblot analysis showed that ␣- and ␤-syn proteins
were up-regulated by macroautophagy inhibitor 3-ma as well
as by ammonium chloride, which inhibits lysosomal activity
independently of the form of autophagy. by contrast, protea-
some inhibitor lactacystin had little effect on the expression of
both ␣- and ␤-syn proteins (fig. 8a). thus, these results sug-
gested that ␣- and ␤-syn were preferentially degraded by auto-
phagy-lysosomal pathway.
then, to determine whether down-regulation of autophagy-
lysosomal activity affects proteasome function, proteasome
activity was evaluated by treatment with autophagy-lysosomal
inhibitors. the result showed that treatments with autophagy-
lysosomal inhibitors significantly decreased proteasome activ-
ities in ␣-syn-overexpressing cells but not in other cell types
(fig. 8b). by contrast, inhibition of proteasome by lactacystin
had little effect on cathepsin b activity (data not shown). simi-
larly, treatment of pma, which was shown to stimulate protea-
some activity (fig. 6), had little effects on cathepsin b activity
(data not shown).
␣-synuclein and tumor differentiation
figure 7. up-regulation of lysosomal activity in ␣-syn-overexpressing
mg63 cells. a, measurement of cathepsin b activity. cell extracts (10 ␮g) were
prepared as described under “experimental procedures” were analyzed for
cathepsin b activity using fluorogenic substrates. released fluorescence
(excitation, 380 nm; emission, 460 nm) was monitored each 5 min up to 60
min. fluorogenic intensity of each time point was plotted, and slope was
calculated. data shown are the mean ⫾ s.d. (n ⫽ 3). *, p ⬍ 0.05; **, p ⬍ 0.01.
b, immunoblot analysis of cathepsin b. cell extracts (v2, ␣1, and ␤5) were
analyzed by immunoblotting using anti-cathepsin b antibody (upper panel)
and anti-actin antibody (lower panel). c, electron microscopic analysis. typi-
cally, ␣-syn-overexpressing cells (␣1: a, c, e, and f) exhibited numerous
enlarged electron-dense lysosomes (white arrowheads), vacuoles that might
have already discharged their contents (white arrows), autolysosome-like
body (black arrow), and myelinosome-like structures (black arrowheads). the
enclosed area in panel e is magnified in panel f. fewer lysosomal structures
were found in vector-transfected cells (v2, b) and ␤-syn-overexpressing cells
(␤5, d). bars represent 8 ␮m (a and b, x1500), 2 ␮m (c and d, ⫻5000), 1 ␮m (e,
⫻13000), or 0.5 ␮m (f, ⫻26000).
cellular differentiation. thus, these results suggest that autoph-
agy-lysosomal pathway may mitigate the down-regulation of
proteasome activity by ␣-syn, therefore leading to abrogate cel-
lular differentiation by ␣-syn.
discussion
although ␣-syn was previously shown to be expressed in the
brain tumors that preferentially displayed differentiation rather
thanproliferation,littlehasbeendocumentedregardingtheroleof
finally, it was shown that treatment with both 3-ma and
ammonium chloride significantly stimulated alp activity,
osteocalcin expression, and matrix mineralization in ␣-syn-
overexpressing cells compared with other cell types (fig. 8, c
and d, data not shown). taken together, inhibition of autoph-
agy-lysosomal activity in ␣-syn-overexpressing cells resulted in
down-regulation of proteasome activity, leading to stimulate
february 23, 2007 • volume 282 • number 8
journal of biological chemistry 5745
␣-synuclein and tumor differentiation
pressing
and vector-transfected
cells (fig. 3), it was assumed that
down-regulation of proteasome
activity by ␣-syn could be at play for
accelerated cellular differentiation
in ␣-syn-overexpressing cells. sup-
porting this notion, expression lev-
els of p21 were up-regulated due to
increased stability at the protein
level. furthermore, high molecular
weight proteins with polyubiquity-
lation were also significantly accu-
mulated (fig. 3). thus, it was inter-
preted that decreased proteasome
activity might result in prolonged
g1 phase of cell cycle, which could
be prerequisite for proliferating
cells to escape from cell cycle and
proceed to differentiation. indeed, it
has been well described that protea-
some inhibitors stimulated cellular
differentiation in a variety of cell
types,
including osteoblastic cells
(45), pc12 cells (46, 47), and oligo-
dendrocytes (48). for example, pro-
teasome inhibitors induced osteo-
blastic differentiation and bone
formation in vitro and in vivo, which
were associated with up-regulation
of bone morphogenetic protein-2
(45). it was also shown that protea-
some inhibitors stimulated neurite
outgrowth in pc12 cells through
activation of c-jun nh2-terminal
kinase signaling pathway (46, 47).
we also confirmed that treatment
of wild-type mg63 cells with pro-
teasome inhibitors, such as mg132
and lactacystin, resulted in similar
differentiation phenotype as characterized by increased expres-
sion of p21, up-regulation of alp and osteocalcin, and
enhanced matrix mineralization (fig. 4).
then, what is the mechanism through which ␣-syn sup-
presses proteasome activity? in this regard several reports have
already documented a possibility that ␣-syn may directly inter-
fere with the proteasome. based on two-hybrid screening,
␣-syn was shown to bind to s6⬘, a component of the 19 s sub-
unit in the 26 s proteasome, in cell cultures (41). subsequently,
it was shown that aggregated ␣-syn, but not its monomeric
form, efficiently inhibited the activity of the 26 s proteasome
under the cell-free conditions (42, 43, 49). using ␣-syn-overex-
pressing mg63 cells, we observed that s6a was co-precipitated
with ␣-syn by co-immunoprecipitation experiment, although
immunofluorescence/lscm study revealed that these mole-
cules were partially colocalized in the cytoplasm (fig. 5).
although we failed to observe any evidence of aggregated ␣-syn
by both immunoblotting and immunofluorescence/lscm (fig.
1b, a and b), one possible explanation for supporting the pos-
figure 8. autophagy-lysosome inhibitor treatment decreases proteasome activity and stimulates cel-
lular differentiation in ␣-syn-overexpressing mg63 cells. a, immunoblot analysis of syn proteins. cells (␣1,
and ␤5) were incubated under the low serum (0.1%) conditions for 24 h and then treated with 10% serum in the
presence of lactacystin (10 ␮m), ammonium chloride (nh4cl) (20 mm), and 3-ma (10 mm) for 24 h. cell lysates
were analyzed by immunoblotting using syn-1 (upper panel) and anti-␤-syn monoclonal antibody (low panel).
blots were reprobed with anti-actin antibody. similar results were obtained by three independent experi-
ments. b, measurement of proteasome activity. cells (v2, ␣1, and ␤5) were prepared as described in a. cell
extracts (5 ␮g) were harvested and incubated with fluorogenic proteasome substrate at 37 °c. released fluo-
rescence (excitation, 380 nm; emission, 460 nm) was monitored each 5 min up to 60 min. fluorogenic intensity
of each time point was plotted, and slope was calculated. data shown are the mean ⫾ s.d. (n ⫽ 3). please note
that proteasome activity was significantly decreased in ␣-syn-overexpressing cells by ammonium chloride
treatment (*, p ⬍ 0.05). c, measurement of alp activity. vector-transfected (v2) and ␣-syn-overexpressing cells
(␣1) were prepared as described in a. cell extracts at 12 h of treatment were incubated with p-nitrophenyl
phosphate at 37 °c for 90 min. the amount of released nitrophenol was monitored by the absorbance at 415 nm.
data shown are the mean ⫾ s.d. (n ⫽ 3). *, p ⬍ 0.05; **, p ⬍ 0.01. d, in vitro mineralization assay. vector-transfected
(v2) and ␣-syn-overexpressing cells (␣1) were treated with ammonium chloride (10 mm), 3-ma, (10 mm), or lactacys-
tin (1 ␮m) for 2–4 weeks (2w–4w). matrix mineralization was then evaluated by alizarin red staining. please note that
the staining was stimulated by ammonium chloride and to a lesser extent by 3-ma in ␣-syn-overexpressing cells but
not in vector-transfected cells. similar results were obtained by three independent experiments.
␣-syn for tumor differentiation. the present study showed that
␣-syn-overexpressing mg63 osteosarcoma cells specifically
exhibited phenotype of osteoblastic differentiation. compared
with both ␤-syn-overexpressing and vector-transfected cells,
␣-syn-overexpressing cells were characterized by decreased
growth rates, associated with increased expression of p21 and
reducedphosphorylatedrb(figs.1and3),indicatingthatthepro-
gression from g1 to s phase was compromised in these cells. the
prolonged g1 phase would be prerequisite for transition from g1
to g0 and subsequent cellular differentiation. consistent with this
view, osteoblastic differentiation markers, including alp and
osteocalcin, were significantly up-regulated in ␣-syn-overexpress-
ing cells compared with other cell types (fig. 2). furthermore,
␣-syn-overexpressing cells, but not other cell types, were induced
to form matrix mineralization during long-term cultures (fig. 2).
taken together, our results using osteosarcoma cells support the
contention that ␣-syn might stimulate tumor differentiation.
because proteasome activity was significantly lower in
␣-syn-overexpressing cells compared with both ␤-syn-overex-
5746 journal of biological chemistry
volume 282 • number 8 • february 23, 2007
sibility of the direct suppression of proteasome by ␣-syn could
be that misfolded monomer of ␣-syn rather than sds-resistant
oligomers/high molecular aggregates might be at play for the
suppression of proteasome functions in ␣-syn-overexpressing
mg63 cells. in contrast to ␣-syn, ␤-syn, a less aggregate-prone
protein that is non-amyloidogenic under the physiological con-
ditions, had little effect on proteasome activity. the result is
consistent with the previous report by snyder et al. (49).
an alternative possibility that we favor is that alteration of
signal transduction might play an important role for suppres-
sion of proteasome activity in ␣-syn-overexpressing cells.
indeed, it has been shown that various signaling molecules in
mitogen-activated protein kinase and phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase pathways were altered by accumulation of ␣-syn in a
variety of cell cultures (35, 50). in the present study the role of
the pkc signaling pathway was addressed for the regulation of
proteasome activity because it was recently shown that treat-
ment of skeletal muscle with phorbol ester stimulated protea-
some activity (39). consistent with a previous study using neu-
roblastoma cells and human brains (40), ␣-syn was shown to
bind with pkc, thereby down-regulating the activity of this
molecule in ␣-syn-overexpressing mg63 cells (fig. 5). further-
more, treatment of ␣-syn-overexpressing cells with pma sig-
nificantly restored the proteasome activity and abrogated dif-
ferentiation in these cells (fig. 6). thus, proteasome activities
were inversely correlated with the extent of differentiation,
reinforcing the concept that suppression of proteasome activity
by ␣-syn may accelerate differentiation. although the precise
mechanism by which the proteasome is activated by pkc stim-
ulation requires further investigation, it is possible that phos-
phorylation might be involved. supporting this notion, it was
recently shown that phosphorylation of ␣subunits of 20 s pro-
teasome by various stimuli, such as ␥-interferon and casein
kinase ii, was important for the regulation of the stability of 26
s proteasome complexes in mammalian cells (51). taken
together, proteasome activity may be regulated through phos-
phorylation by signal transduction pathways, including pkc,
which may be down-regulated by accumulation of ␣-syn.
given the emerging role of autophagy-lysosomal pathway for
the degradation of ␣-syn (52, 53), it is probable that alteration of
this pathway may affect ␣-syn-mediated suppression of protea-
some activity. indeed, the present study showed that the lyso-
somal activity was significantly up-regulated in ␣-syn-overex-
pressing cells compared with other cells (fig. 7). furthermore,
in ␣-syn-overexpressing cells, inhibition of the autophagy-lyso-
somal pathway resulted in down-regulation of proteasome
activity associated with up-regulation of ␣-syn, whereas inhibi-
tion of proteasome activity had little effect on autophagy-lyso-
somal activity with little change of ␣-syn, suggesting that auto-
phagy-lysosomal pathway is dominant to negatively regulate
proteasome activities in these cells (fig. 8). together, these
results suggest that lysosomal activity was up-regulated due to
the compensatory mechanisms against increased level of ␣-syn.
it has been recently shown that the autophagy-lysosomal path-
way has pleiotropic roles in the regulation of cancer (54). for
example, this pathway may be indispensable to tumors that
must frequently survive under the nutrient-poor environ-
ments. conversely, loss of function of this pathway might be
␣-synuclein and tumor differentiation
beneficial because of accumulation of genotoxic substances in
the cytoplasm that could promote mutation and, hence, tumor-
igenesis. the present study may provide a novel mechanism
that the autophagy-lysosomal degradation pathway might neg-
atively modulate the ups-regulated cellular differentiation in
␣-syn-overexpressing tumors.
because the identification of gene mutations of parkin in
recessive familial pd and further characterization of this mol-
ecule as a ubiquitin e3 ligase, it has been extensively shown that
dysfunction of ups may be one major pathogenic pathway for
pd and related neurodegenerative disorders. in this context,
much literature has described that overexpression of ␣-syn was
shown to result in decreased proteasome activities in a variety
of biological system, including yeast (55) and the inducible
expression system in pc12 cells (56), whereas some studies
described that suppression of proteasome activity was not
observed either in transgenic mice or in some cell cultures,
including pc12 and 293 cells (37). our results are in line with
the former reports and further suggest that down-regulation of
ups by ␣-syn may play an important role for cells to escape
from cell cycle and commit to cellular differentiation. although
little has been documented regarding the role of ␣-syn for cell
cycle, lee et al. (57) previously showed that inducible expres-
sion of ␣-syn in pc12 cells resulted in enhanced proliferation
rates through stimulation of erk pathway whereby cells were
enriched in the s phase associated with increased accumulation
of cyclin b and down-regulation of rb (57). the reason for the
apparent discrepancy between the report by lee et al. (57) and
our present study is obscure. however, one possible explana-
tion is that effects of ␣-syn on growth and differentiation might
be cell type-specific. indeed, it was shown that inducible expres-
sion of ␣-syn in neuro2a cells resulted in inactivation of erk and
other mitogen-activated protein kinase signals (58). taken
together, although our results using mg63 osteosarcoma cells
suggest a role of ␣-syn for tumor differentiation, further investiga-
tion is required to confirm our current findings in vivo.
in conclusion, our results showed that accumulation of ␣-syn
might result in down-regulation of proteasome activity, leading
to accelerate cellular differentiation in osteosarcoma cells. this
process is further modulated by various factors, including pkc
signaling pathway as well as autophagy-lysosomal activity.
moreover, because a recent study has shown that many of other
pd-related molecules are directly or indirectly involved in the
regulation of ups (59), it is possible that the pd-related mole-
cules might converge to regulate the activity of ups in tumor
differentiation. thus, comprehensive understanding of the
common pathway shared by both neurodegenerative disease
and cancer have a great potential to provide a novel insight into
the mechanism of these distinct categories of diseases.
acknowledgments—we thank dr. koji okamoto (national cancer
center research institute, tokyo) for critical reading of the manu-
script and drs. hidetaka yakura and kazuya mizuno (tokyo metro-
politan institute for neuroscience) for instructions on flow cytometry.
we are also indebted to hideki itabashi for help in preparing the
photographs.
february 23, 2007 • volume 282 • number 8
journal of biological chemistry 5747
␣-synuclein and tumor differentiation
references
1. hashimoto, m., and masliah, e. (1999) brain pathol. 9, 707–720
2. trojanowski, j., goedert, m., iwatsubo, t., and lee, v. (1998) cell death
differ. 5, 832–837
3. jakes, r., spillantini, m., and goedert, m. (1994) febs lett. 345, 27–32
4. ueda, k., fukushima, h., masliah, e., xia, y., iwai, a., yoshimoto, m.,
otero, d. a., kondo, j., ihara, y., and saitoh, t. (1993) proc. natl. acad.
sci. u. s. a. 90, 11282–11286
5. lansbury, p. t., jr. (1999) proc. natl. acad. sci. u. s. a. 96, 3342–3344
6. polymeropoulos, m. h., lavedan, c., leroy, e., ide, s. e., dehejia, a.,
dutra, a., pike, b., root, h., rubenstein, j., boyer, r., stenroos, e. s.,
chandrasekharappa, s., athanassiadou, a., papapetropoulos, t., johnson,
w. g., lazzarini, a. m., duvoisin, r. c., di iorio, g., golbe, l. i., and
nussbaum, r. l. (1997) science 276, 2045–2047
7. kruger, r., kuhn, w., muller, t., woitalla, d., graeber, m., kosel, s.,
przuntek, h., epplen, j. t., schols, l., and riess, o. (1998) nat. genet. 18,
106–108
8. zarranz, j. j., alegre, j., gomez-esteban, j. c., lezcano, e., ros, r., ampu-
ero, i., vidal, l., hoenicka, j., rodriguez, o., atares, b., llorens, v., gomez
tortosa, e., del ser, t., munoz, d. g., and de yebenes, j. g. (2004) ann.
neurol. 55, 164–173
9. hashimoto, m., rockenstein, e., mante, m., mallory, m., and masliah, e.
(2001) neuron 32, 213–223
10. park, j. y., and lansbury, p. t., jr. (2003) biochemistry 42, 3696–3700
11. ji, h., liu, y. e., jia, t., wang, m., liu, j., xiao, g., joseph, b. k., rosen, c.,
and shi, y. e. (1997) cancer res. 57, 759–764
12. lavedan, c., leroy, e., dehejia, a., buchholtz, s., dutra, a., nussbaum,
r. l., and polymeropoulos, m. h. (1998) hum. genet. 103, 106–112
13. zhao, w., liu, h., liu, w., wu, y., chen, w., jiang, b., zhou, y., xue, r.,
luo, c., wang, l., jiang, j. d., and liu, j. (2006) int. j. oncol. 28, 1081–1088
14. li, z., sclabas, g. m., peng, b., hess, k. r., abbruzzese, j. l., evans, d. b.,
and chiao, p. j. (2004) cancer 101, 58–65
15. iwaki, h., kageyama, s., isono, t., wakabayashi, y., okada, y., yoshimura,
k., terai, a., arai, y., iwamura, h., kawakita, m., and yoshiki, t. (2004)
cancer sci. 95, 955–961
16. jia, t., liu, y. e., liu, j., and shi, y. e. (1999) cancer res. 59, 742–747
17. liu, h., liu, w., wu, y., zhou, y., xue, r., luo, c., wang, l., zhao, w.,
jiang, j. d., and liu, j. (2005) cancer res. 65, 7635–7643
18. gupta, a., inaba, s., wong, o. k., fang, g., and liu, j. (2003) oncogene 22,
19. inaba, s., li, c., shi, y. e., song, d. q., jiang, j. d., and liu, j. (2005) breast
7593–7599
cancer res. treat. 94, 25–35
(2003) cancer res. 63, 3899–3903
20. jiang, y., liu, y. e., lu, a., gupta, a., goldberg, i. d., liu, j., and shi, y. e.
21. west, a. b., dawson, v. l., and dawson, t. m. (2005) trends neurosci. 28,
22. wang, f., denison, s., lai, j. p., philips, l. a., montoya, d., kock, n.,
schule, b., klein, c., shridhar, v., roberts, l. r., and smith, d. i. (2004)
genes chromosomes cancer 40, 85–96
23. picchio, m. c., martin, e. s., cesari, r., calin, g. a., yendamuri, s., kuroki,
t., pentimalli, f., sarti, m., yoder, k., kaiser, l. r., fishel, r., and croce,
c. m. (2004) clin. cancer res. 10, 2720–2724
24. liu, y., lashuel, h. a., choi, s., xing, x., case, a., ni, j., yeh, l. a., cuny,
g. d., stein, r. l., and lansbury, p. t., jr. (2003) chem. biol. 10, 837–846
25. caballero, o. l., resto, v., patturajan, m., meerzaman, d., guo, m. z.,
engles, j., yochem, r., ratovitski, e., sidransky, d., and jen, j. (2002) on-
cogene 21, 3003–3010
26. nagakubo, d., taira, t., kitaura, h., ikeda, m., tamai, k., iguchi-ariga,
s. m., and ariga, h. (1997) biochem. biophys. res. commun. 231, 509–513
27. kim, r. h., peters, m., jang, y., shi, w., pintilie, m., fletcher, g. c., de-
luca, c., liepa, j., zhou, l., snow, b., binari, r. c., manoukian, a. s., bray,
m. r., liu, f. f., tsao, m. s., and mak, t. w. (2005) cancer cell 7, 263–273
28. kawashima, m., suzuki, s. o., doh-ura, k., and iwaki, t. (2000) acta
neuropathol. (berl.) 99, 154–160
348–352
29. fung, k. m., rorke, l. b., giasson, b., lee, v. m., and trojanowski, j. q.
neurosci. 7, 207–219
5748 journal of biological chemistry
volume 282 • number 8 • february 23, 2007
(2003) acta neuropathol. (berl.) 106, 167–175
30. bruening, w., giasson, b. i., klein-szanto, a. j., lee, v. m., trojanowski,
j. q., and godwin, a. k. (2000) cancer 88, 2154–2163
31. hashimoto, m., yoshimoto, m., sisk, a., hsu, l. j., sundsmo, m., kittel, a.,
saitoh, t., miller, a., and masliah, e. (1997) biochem. biophys. res. com-
mun. 237, 611–616
32. stefanis, l., kholodilov, n., rideout, h. j., burke, r. e., and greene, l. a.
(2001) j. neurochem. 76, 1165–1176
33. takeda, a., hashimoto, m., mallory, m., sundsumo, m., hansen, l., and
masliah, e. (2000) acta neuropathol. (berl) 99, 296–304
34. takenouchi, t., hashimoto, m., hsu, l. j., mackowski, b., rockenstein, e.,
mallory, m., and masliah, e. (2001) mol. cell. neurosci. 17, 141–150
35. hashimoto, m., takenouchi, t., rockenstein, e., and masliah, e. (2003)
j. neurochem. 85, 1468–1479
36. tanimoto, y., yokozeki, m., hiura, k., matsumoto, k., nakanishi, h.,
matsumoto, t., marie, p. j., and moriyama, k. (2004) j. biol. chem. 279,
45926–45934
37. martin-clemente, b., alvarez-castelao, b., mayo, i., sierra, a. b., diaz, v.,
milan, m., farinas, i., gomez-isla, t., ferrer, i., and castano, j. g. (2004)
j. biol. chem. 279, 52984–52990
38. nakai, m., toshimori, k., yoshinaga, k., nasu, t., and hess, r. a. (1998)
cell tissue res. 294, 145–152
39. wyke, s. m., and tisdale, m. j. (2006) life sci. 78, 2898–2910
40. ostrerova, n., petrucelli, l., farrer, m., mehta, m., choi, p., hardy, j., and
wolozin, b. (1999) j. neurosci. 19, 5782–5791
41. ghee, m., fournier, a., and mallet, j. (2000) j. neurochem. 75, 2221–2224
42. snyder, h., mensah, k., theisler, c., lee, j., matouschek, a., and wolozin,
b. (2003) j. biol. chem. 278, 11753–11759
43. lindersson, e., beedholm, r., hojrup, p., moos, t., gai, w., hendil, k. b.,
and jensen, p. h. (2004) j. biol. chem. 279, 12924–12934
44. rubinsztein, d. c. (2006) nature 443, 780–786
45. garrett, i. r., chen, d., gutierrez, g., zhao, m., escobedo, a., rossini, g.,
harris, s. e., gallwitz, w., kim, k. b., hu, s., crews, c. m., and mundy,
g. r. (2003) j. clin. investig. 111, 1771–1782
46. obin, m., mesco, e., gong, x., haas, a. l., joseph, j., and taylor, a. (1999)
47. giasson, b. i., bruening, w., durham, h. d., and mushynski, w. e. (1999)
48. pasquini, l. a., paez, p. m., moreno, m. a., pasquini, j. m., and soto, e. f.
j. biol. chem. 274, 11789–11795
j. neurochem. 72, 1081–1087
(2003) j. neurosci. 23, 4635–4644
49. snyder, h., mensah, k., hsu, c., hashimoto, m., surgucheva, i. g., festoff,
b., surguchov, a., masliah, e., matouschek, a., and wolozin, b. (2005)
j. biol. chem. 280, 7562–7569
50. seo, j. h., rah, j. c., choi, s. h., shin, j. k., min, k., kim, h. s., park, c. h.,
kim, s., kim, e. m., lee, s. h., lee, s., suh, s. w., and suh, y. h. (2002)
faseb j. 16, 1826–1828
51. bose, s., stratford, f. l., broadfoot, k. i., mason, g. g., and rivett, a. j.
(2004) biochem. j. 378, 177–184
52. webb, j. l., ravikumar, b., atkins, j., skepper, j. n., and rubinsztein, d. c.
(2003) j. biol. chem. 278, 25009–25013
53. cuervo, a. m., stefanis, l., fredenburg, r., lansbury, p. t., and sulzer, d.
(2004) science 305, 1292–1295
54. mizushima, n. (2005) cell death differ. 12, suppl. 2, 1535–1541
55. chen, q., thorpe, j., and keller, j. n. (2005) j. biol. chem. 280,
30009–30017
56. tanaka, y., engelender, s., igarashi, s., rao, r. k., wanner, t., tanzi, r. e.,
sawa, a., v. l. d., dawson, t. m., and ross, c. a. (2001) hum. mol. genet.
10, 919–926
57. lee, s. s., kim, y. m., junn, e., lee, g., park, k. h., tanaka, m., ronchetti,
r. d., quezado, m. m., and mouradian, m. m. (2003) neurobiol. aging 24,
687–696
58. iwata, a., maruyama, m., kanazawa, i., and nukina, n. (2001) j. biol.
chem. 276, 45320–45329
59. abou-sleiman, p. m., muqit, m. m., and wood, n. w. (2006) nat. rev.