the embo journal (2006) 25, 5396–5404 | & 2006 european molecular biology organization | all rights reserved 0261-4189/06
www.embojournal.org
ferroportin-mediated mobilization of ferritin iron
precedes ferritin degradation by the proteasome
the
the
embo
embo
embo
journal
journal
ivana de domenico1,3, michael b
vaughn1,3, liangtao li1, dustin bagley1,
giovanni musci2, diane m ward1
and jerry kaplan1,*
1department of pathology, school of medicine, university of utah,
salt lake city, utah, usa and 2dipartimento di scienze e tecnologie
agro-alimentari, ambientali e microbiologiche, univerisity of molise,
campobasso, italy
ferritin is a cytosolic molecule comprised of subunits
that self-assemble into a nanocage capable of containing
up to 4500 iron atoms. iron stored within ferritin can be
mobilized for use within cells or exported from cells.
expression of ferroportin (fpn) results in export of cyto-
solic iron and ferritin degradation. fpn-mediated iron loss
from ferritin occurs in the cytosol and precedes ferritin
degradation by the proteasome. depletion of
ferritin
iron induces the monoubiquitination of ferritin subunits.
ubiquitination is not required for iron release but is
required for disassembly of
ferritin nanocages, which
is followed by degradation of ferritin by the proteasome.
speciﬁc mammalian machinery is not required to extract
iron from ferritin. iron can be removed from ferritin when
ferritin is expressed in saccharomyces cerevisiae, which
does not have endogenous ferritin. expressed ferritin is
monoubiquitinated and degraded by the proteasome.
exposure of ubiquitination defective mammalian cells to
the iron chelator desferrioxamine leads to degradation
of ferritin in the lysosome, which can be prevented by
inhibitors of autophagy. thus, ferritin degradation can
occur through two different mechanisms.
the embo journal (2006) 25, 5396–5404. doi:10.1038/
sj.emboj.7601409; published online 2 november 2006
subject categories: proteins; cellular metabolism
keywords: ferritin; iron; proteasome; ubiquitin; yeast
introduction
sequestration of iron within ferritin is the mechanism by
which most eukaryotic cells store iron. cells can mobilize
iron from ferritin for export and for heme synthesis (peto
et al, 1983). the mechanisms by which iron regulates ferritin
synthesis and by which iron enters ferritin have been well
characterized (liu and theil, 2005). in contrast, the mechan-
ism(s) by which iron exits ferritin is unclear. studies have
*corresponding author. department of pathology, university of utah
school of medicine, 50 north medical drive, salt lake city, ut 84132,
usa. tel.: þ 1 801 581 7427; fax: þ 1 801 581 6001;
e-mail: jerry.kaplan@path.utah.edu
3these authors contributed equally to the work
received: 23 august 2006; accepted: 5 october 2006; published
online: 2 november 2006
shown that reductants in the presence of iron chelators can
lead to iron loss from puriﬁed ferritin (harrison et al, 1974)
and that engineered amino-acid substitutions in recombinant
ferritin molecules can accelerate iron loss (takagi et al, 1998).
these studies suggesting that
iron exits ferritin through
a pore in the assembled ferritin nanocage. these studies,
however, have relied solely on in vitro analyses and there is
no evidence that iron can exit ferritin prior to ferritin degra-
dation. other studies have shown that cytosolic ferritin
gains entry into lysosomes and that
ferritin degradation
within lysosomes is responsible for iron release. the lyso-
somal degradation of ferritin has been seen in cells induced
for autophagy by amino-acid starvation (harrison et al,
1974), in cells infected with neisseria (larson et al, 2004),
in cells exposed to drugs such as the iron chelators (bridges,
1987; konijn et al, 1999; kidane et al, 2006) and the anti-
cancer agent doxorubicin (kwok and richardson, 2004) or
in cells given a high iron load through the administration
of cationic ferritin (radisky and kaplan, 1998). iron release
from ferritin could be blocked by inhibiting lysosomal
proteolysis, either by increasing lysosomal ph or through
addition of protease inhibitors. entry of ferritin into lyso-
somes may, however, reﬂect a response to cellular stresses,
rather than a physiological route for iron release.
to evaluate the role of lysosomes in ferritin iron release,
we expressed the plasma membrane iron exporter ferroportin
(fpn). fpn is a cell surface iron transporter present on all
cell types that export iron into plasma. mutations in fpn lead
to cellular iron accumulation, most of which is in ferritin
(ganz and nemeth, 2006). we have utilized the regulated
expression of fpn to examine the mechanism by which iron
exits ferritin. our results show that degradation of ferritin is
not required for mobilization of iron and that iron-poor
ferritin is degraded in the cytosol through the action of the
proteasome. monoubiquitination of
ferritin nanocages is
required for ferritin disassembly. monoubiquitination and
proteasomal
ferritin degradation can also be seen when
ferritin is expressed in saccharomyces cerevisiae, a species
that does not contain endogenous ferritin. these results show
that iron exit from ferritin, like iron entry into ferritin, is an
autonomous property of the ferritin nanocage.
results
fpn-mediated ferritin degradation occurs in the cytosol
expression of fpn leads to decreased cytosolic iron and
reduced levels of ferritin (nemeth et al, 2004). to determine
if expression of fpn leads to the lysosomal degradation of
ferritin, cells stably transformed with an ecdysone regulated
fpn-gfp were incubated with ferric ammonium citrate (fac)
as a source of iron and, in the continued presence of fac,
with the ecdysone analog ponasterone a to induce expression
of fpn-gfp. cells exposed to fac accumulate large amounts
of ferritin as determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (elisa), while expression of fpn-gfp led to the loss of
5396
the embo journal vol 25 | no 22 | 2006
& 2006 european molecular biology organization
proteasome-mediated ferritin degradation
i de domenico et al
figure 1 fpn-mediated decrease in ferritin is not prevented by chloroquine or leupeptin. (a) hek293t-fpn cells were incubated with fac
(10 mm fe) for 24 h followed by incubation for 6 h in the absence or presence of 10 mm ponasterone a. cells were then incubated with and
without 100 mm chloroquine or 10 mm leupeptin for 10 h and harvested. the ferritin content was determined by elisa. induction of fpn resulted
in decreased ferritin levels and this was not prevented by treatment with chloroquine or leupeptin. the data are presented as the standard
deviation from three different experiments. (b) cells treated as in (a) were incubated in the presence of 1 mg/ml egf for 2 h. cells were
ﬁxed and processed for immunoﬂuorescence using mouse anti-egf receptor and alexa 594 conjugated goat anti-mouse igg. chloroquine and
leupeptin effectively inhibit degradation of egf receptor.
accumulated ferritin (figure 1a, columns 1 and 2). the
fpn-gfp-mediated decrease in ferritin was not prevented by
chloroquine (figure 1a, column 3) or leupeptin (figure 1a,
column 4). these agents prevent
lysosomal proteolysis
either by increasing lysosomal ph (chloroquine) or inhibiting
lysosomal proteases (leupeptin). to conﬁrm that these agents
inhibited lysosomal proteolysis, we added epidermal growth
factor (egf) to cells, which results in the internalization of
the egf–egf receptor complex and subsequent degradation
of the complex in lysosomes. addition of egf to control
cells resulted in loss of the egf receptor (figure 1b). addition
of egf to either chloroquine or leupeptin-treated cells led
to the disappearance of the receptor from the cell surface and
its accumulation in late endosomes/lysosomes (figure 1b).
since chloroquine and leupeptin do inhibit lysosomal proteo-
lysis, we attribute the loss of
ferritin to non-lysosomal
proteolysis.
these results suggest that upon induction of fpn-gfp,
ferritin remains in the cytosol even as cells are being depleted
of iron. we conﬁrmed this result by examining the subcellular
distribution of ferritin. fpn was induced in iron-loaded cells.
the cells were homogenized, the homogenate fractionated
on a percoll gradient and the distribution of lysosomes and
ferritin determined (supplementary figure 1). the lysosomal
enzyme b-n-acetylhexoseaminidase showed two peaks of
activity, neither of which was coincident with ferritin. we
note the presence of a single point of ferritin in fraction three
of the gradient. while the amount of ferritin decreased upon
expression of fpn-gfp, the subcellular distribution of ferritin
was not affected even in cells incubated with leupeptin or
chloroquine. these results support
ferritin is not being degraded in lysosomes.
the conclusion that
cytosolic degradation of ferritin is proteasome-
mediated
if ferritin is degraded in the cytosol, degradation by the
proteasome would be likely. addition of proteasome inhbitors
mg132 or lactacystin to cells prevented the fpn-gfp induced
loss of ferritin (figure 2a). for many proteins, a prerequisite
for proteasome degradation is the covalent attachment of
ubiquitin. to determine if ferritin is ubiquitinated, ferritin
was immunoprecipitated and the immunoprecipitate exam-
ined for ubiquitin by western blotting. there was no evidence
of ubiquitinated ferritin in control cells, in cells incubated
with fac or in cells incubated with fac and induced to
express fpn-gfp (figure 2b). ferritin was ubiquitinated in
cells that had been incubated with fac, induced to express
fpn and incubated with mg132. immunopreciptiated ferritin
contains both h and l chains as detected by western analysis
using h and l speciﬁc antibodies (data not shown). we
are unable to determine whether both h and l chains are
ubiquitinated, as these h and l speciﬁc antibodies do not
work for immunoprecipitation. no evidence of an ubiquitin
‘ladder’ was seen and the increase in molecular mass of
ferritin is consistent with monoubiquitination. we also
noted the presence of a 40-kda band that is detected with
the anti-ferritin antibody (data not shown). this 40 kda band
was shown to be a crosslinked dimer of ferritin subunits
(mertz and theil, 1983). the 40-kda band was also ubiqui-
tinated with what appears to be a single ubiquitin.
& 2006 european molecular biology organization
the embo journal vol 25 | no 22 | 2006 5397
proteasome-mediated ferritin degradation
i de domenico et al
figure 2 fpn-mediated decrease in ferritin results from degradation by the proteasome. (a) hek293t-fpn cells were incubated with fac (10 mm
fe) for 24 h followed by incubation for 6 h in the absence or presence of 10 mm ponasterone a. cells were then treated with or without 10 mm
mg132 or 10 mm lactacystin in the presence of ponasterone a for 10 h and harvested. the ferritin content was determined by elisa. error bars
represent the standard deviation from three different experiments in duplicate. (b) samples treated as in (a) were immunoprecipitated using anti-
ferritin antibodies and the immunoprecipitate examined for the presence of ferritin or ubiquitin by western blot analysis. the arrows indicate the
migration of h and l chains. (c) cells were incubated with 1.0 10 7 m tf(59fe)2 for 24 h followed by incubation for 6 h in the absence or
presence of 10 mm ponasterone a. cells were then treated with or without 10 mm mg132 in the presence of ponasterone a for 10 h and harvested
and the amount of 59fe in immunoprecipitated ferritin was determined. (d) cells were treated as described in (a) and cell extracts were applied to
size exclusion chromatography and the ferritin content, in selected fractions, was determined by elisa. error bars represent the standard
deviation from three different experiments in duplicate. (e) cells were treated as described in (c), ferritin was then immunoprecipitated, eluted
using 100 mm glycine, ph 2.5 and measured by elisa. the amount of ferritin-associated 59fe was measured and the speciﬁc activity of ferritin
determined. error bars represent the standard deviation from three different experiments in duplicate. (f) samples were treated as in (d), and
ferritin was immunoprecipitated and analyzed by western blot analysis using an antibody to ubiquitin.
iron might be released after ferritin degradation or iron
might exit ferritin followed by the degradation of the now
iron-poor ferritin nanocage. to distinguish between these
possibilities, cells were incubated with tf (59fe)2 to permit
the accumulation of 59fe ferritin, and then incubated with
ponasterone a to induce fpn-gfp, in the presence or absence
of the proteasome inhibitor mg132. as shown above, induc-
tion of fpn-gfp resulted in a loss of
ferritin that was
prevented by mg132. immunoprecipitation of ferritin and
measurement of 59fe showed that mg132 did not prevent the
loss of 59fe from ferritin (figure 2c). to exclude the possibi-
lity that mg132 leads to the accumulation of
ferritin
monomers, cell extracts were analyzed by size exclusion
chromatography. fractions were assayed for ferritin by
elisa,
immunoprecipitated using antiferritin antibodies,
and the amount of 59fe in the immunoprecipitate determined.
in the absence of fpn expression, only high molecular weight
ferritin (4400 kda) eluted from the size exclusion column
(figure 2d). in the absence of mg132, expression of fpn-gfp
led to a decrease in total cellular ferritin with an increase in
low molecular weight ferritin, indicating that iron loss led to
the disassembly of ferritin nanocages. addition of mg132,
which prevents ferritin loss, also led to the generation of
disassembled ferritin. the speciﬁc activity of 59fe in the
high molecular weight ferritin fraction was increased after
induction of fpn-gfp even though there was a decrease
in total cellular ferritin (figure 2e). addition of mg132
to fpn-gfp expressing cells inhibits ferritin degradation but
not iron loss from ferritin, leading to the accumulation of
iron poor ferritin. this result suggests that in the absence
of the proteasome inhibitor, iron-poor ferritin is preferentially
degraded.
we then determined if iron-poor ferritin nanocages disas-
semble ﬁrst, followed by ubiquitination of free ferritin sub-
units or if ferritin nanocages are ubiquitinated. ferritin was
extracted from cells incubated with ponasterone a and
mg132 and ferritin nanocages were separated from ferritin
subunits by size exclusion chromatography. the ubiquitina-
tion status of both ferritin nanocages and subunits were
determined by western blotting. both assembled ferritin
and ferritin monomers were ubiquitinated (figure 2f),
suggesting that ubiquitination occurs before subunit dis-
assembly. again, no evidence for polyubiquitination was
seen on assembled or disassembled ferritin.
release of iron from ferritin does not require
ubiquitination
to determine if ubiquitination is required for iron release
from ferritin, we utilized a cell line that has a temperature
sensitive e1-ligase (finley et al, 1984). incubation of mutant
cells (ts85) at the restrictive temperature inactivates the
enzyme, decreasing the ability of cells to ubiquitinate target
5398
the embo journal vol 25 | no 22 | 2006
& 2006 european molecular biology organization
proteasome-mediated ferritin degradation
i de domenico et al
proteins. ts85 and parental cells (fm3a), however, do not
express fpn and once iron-loaded, both cell
lines retain
ferritin in the absence of iron (data not shown). to promote
iron loss, cells were transformed with a plasmid expressing
fpn-gfp under the control of the cmv promoter. expression
of fpn-gfp resulted in an inability of cells to accumulate iron
or ferritin. consequently, transformed cells were incubated
with hepcidin to prevent iron export, thus permitting ferritin
accumulation. transformed cells were incubated with fac for
24 h and then hepcidin was removed. cells were then in-
cubated at both permissive and restrictive temperatures. fpn-
gfp transformed fm3a or ts85 cells incubated with hepcidin
accumulated similar amounts of ferritin and ferritin levels
decreased when hepcidin was removed (figure 3a). the
decrease in ferritin was similar in fm3a cells incubated at
the permissive and restrictive temperature and in ts85 cells
at
the permissive temperature. there was, however, an
increased retention of ferritin in mutant cells at the restrictive
ts85 cells
temperature. western analysis conﬁrmed that
incubated at
the restrictive temperature were unable to
ubiquitinate ferritin. while ts85 cells synthesize both h and
l chains, we only detect one ubiquitinated ferritin band.
we cannot determine whether this band is the h or l chain
because the h and l speciﬁc antibodies cannot be used for
immunoprecipitation (supplementary figure s2).
these results indicate that ubiquitination is required for
ferritin degradation. the ts85 cells also permitted us to
determine if ubiquitin addition is required for iron-release.
cells were treated as described above, but tf(59fe)2 was used
to iron-load cells. once iron loaded, hepcidin was removed to
permit fpn-mediated iron export and cells were incubated
at the restrictive or permissive temperature. ferritin levels
were assayed by elisa and ferritin immunoprecipitated to
determine the amount of 59fe bound to ferritin. removal of
hepcidin resulted in a decrease in ferritin but an increase
in 59fe-ferritin speciﬁc activity in ts85 cells incubated at the
figure 3 ubiquitination is required for fpn-mediated ferritin degradation. (a) fm3a (black) and ts85 (grey) cells were transiently transfected
with a plasmid containing cmv-regulated fpn-gfp and incubated in the presence of fac (10 mm fe) and 0.5 mm hepcidin for 24 h. hepcidin was
either maintained ( þ ) or removed ( ) to allow fpn-gfp localization at the plasma membrane. cells were maintained at the permissive
temperature (331c) or moved to the restrictive temperature (391c) and incubated for 6 h. cells were harvested and ferritin content determined
by elisa. error bars represent the standard deviation from three different experiments in duplicate. (b) fm3a and ts85 cells were treated as in
(a) but fac was replaced with 1.0 10 7 m tf(59fe)2. ferritin was immunoprecipitated and the speciﬁc activity of 59fe-ferritin determined.
error bars represent the standard deviation from three different experiments in duplicate. (c) ts85 cells were treated as in (b) and cell extracts
applied to size exclusion chromatography. ferritin content in selected fractions was measured by elisa. black bars represent assembled ferritin
(4400 kda), gray bars represent monomeric (o50 kda). (d) fm3a and ts85 cells were treated as in (a) but cells that had been incubated at
the restrictive temperature (391c) were then returned to the permissive temperature (331c) and incubated in the presence of cycloheximide
(75 mg/ml) and 10 mm fac for 1 h. cells were then harvested and ferritin levels determined by elisa. error bars represent the standard
deviation from three different experiments in duplicate.
& 2006 european molecular biology organization
the embo journal vol 25 | no 22 | 2006 5399
proteasome-mediated ferritin degradation
i de domenico et al
permissive temperature and in fm3a cells incubated at either
temperature (figure 3b). this result again suggests that
iron-poor ferritin is preferentially degraded before iron-rich
ferritin. at the restrictive temperature, there was little loss of
ferritin upon hepcidin removal in ts85 cells, consistent with
the need to ubiquitinate ferritin for its degradation. there
was, however, a decrease in 59fe-ferritin speciﬁc activity,
indicating that although ferritin was not degraded, it became
iron poor. these results show that ubiquitination is required
for ferritin degradation but not
for ferritin iron release.
size exclusion chromatography of ferritin, extracted from
fpn-gfp expressing ts85 cells incubated at the restrictive
temperature, revealed that all of the ferritin was present as
assembled cages, as there was little low molecular weight
ferritin (figure 3c). this result shows that ubiquitin addition,
presumably to ferritin subunits, is required to disassemble
ferritin nanocages.
to determine if iron could re-enter ferritin once it has been
released, ts85 cells that had accumulated iron-poor ferritin
at the restrictive temperature were then incubated at the
permissive temperature. this was done under conditions in
which iron export was prevented through addition of hepci-
din, new ferritin synthesis was inhibited by addition of
cycloheximide and iron loading promoted by the addition
of fac. in wild-type cells at either the permissive or restric-
tive temperatures, these additions prevented fpn-mediated
ferritin loss (figure 3d, black bars). in ts85 cells that had
been shifted from the restrictive to the permissive tempera-
ture, these additions did not prevent ferritin loss (figure 3d,
gray bars). if iron could reenter ferritin, then we might expect
that ferritin would be stable at the permissive temperature.
these results indicate that once iron has exited ferritin,
the ferritin nanocage is marked for degradation and cannot
readily re-accumulate iron.
evidence for multiple routes of ferritin degradation
our data show that fpn-mediated ferritin iron release and
degradation occurs in the cytosol. studies by others have
indicated that
ferritin can be degraded in the lysosome
(bridges and hoffman, 1986; kidane et al, 2006). most of
those studies utilized the iron chelator dfo to induce ferritin
iron loss. dfo is a high afﬁnity fe(iii) chelator produced
by streptomyces pilosus that is used clinically to remove
systemic iron in secondary iron overload disorders. we
again took advantage of
the
mechanism of dfo-mediated iron loss was different than
that of fpn-mediated iron loss. addition of dfo to iron-
loaded ts85 cells led to the loss of ferritin even at the
restrictive temperature (figure 4a). further, while mg132
did not prevent dfo-mediated ferritin loss, addition of chloro-
quine did prevent dfo-mediated ferritin loss.
ts85 cells to determine if
it is likely that entry of ferritin into lysosomes might
require an autophagocytic event. sakaida et al (1990) showed
that autophagy of ferritin led to the generation of a pool
of iron that enhanced the cytotoxicity of hydroperoxides.
inhibition of autophagy by agents such as 3-methyladenine
prevented that
toxicity. addition of 3-methyladenine to
dfo-treated ts85 cells inhibited ferritin loss at the restrictive
temperature (figure 4b). this result suggests that dfo does
induce autophagy of
incubation of dfo-treated
control cells with 3-methyladenine did not, however, prevent
ferritin loss. this suggests that in the absence of autophagy,
ferritin.
figure 4 dfo leads to lysosomal degradation of ferritin. fm3a and
ts85 cells were incubated in the presence of fac (10 mm fe) for 12 h.
(a) cells were then incubated at the restrictive temperature (391c)
for 6 h in the presence or absence of 100 mm dfo, with or without
100 mm chloroquine or 10 mm mg132. cells were then harvested and
ferritin content determined by elisa. error bars represent the
standard deviation from three different experiments in duplicate.
(b) cells treated as in (a) were incubated in the presence or absence
of 5 mm 3-methyladenine.
there may be an alternate route for ferritin degradation and
that ts85 cells, which are defective in ubiquitination cannot
access that pathway. this hypothesis was conﬁrmed by
examining the effect of the proteasome inhibitor mg132 on
dfo-induced autophagy in control cells treated with dfo and
3-methyladenine. addition of mg132 to 3-methyladenine
treated control cells prevented ferritin degradation. these
results indicate that ferritin degradation occurs by two routes:
a dfo-induced entry of ferritin into lysosomes and a cytosolic
route in which iron is extracted from ferritin prior to degrada-
tion by the proteasome.
degradation of ferritin expressed in yeast occurs
through the proteasome
to determine if specialized cellular machinery is required to
extract ferritin iron in the cytosol, we expressed ferritin
chains in saccharomyces cerevisiae. fungi, like plants, do
not contain cytosolic ferritin, although plants have ferritin
within organelles. rather, fungi and plants store iron in
vacuoles. vacuolar membrane transporters mediate transfer
5400
the embo journal vol 25 | no 22 | 2006
& 2006 european molecular biology organization
of iron from cytosol to vacuole and from vacuole to cytosol.
since yeast do not express ferritin, it is unlikely that they have
a specialized mechanism to extract iron from ferritin. kim
et al showed that tadpole or human ferritin chains expressed
in yeast could form iron-binding molecules (shin et al, 2001;
kim et al, 2003). we conﬁrmed and extended their results
using genetic approaches to show that ferritin can store iron
in yeast cytosol. first, expression of h and l chains or
h chains under the control of the galactose inducible pro-
moter (gal10) led to increased cellular iron as measured by
atomic absorption spectroscopy (supplementary figure 3a).
second, deletion of ccc1, which encodes the vacuolar iron
importer, results in sensitivity of yeast to high iron (li et al,
2001). expression of ferritin under the galactose promoter
protects dccc1 cells from high iron toxicity (supplementary
figure 3b). expression of ferritin lowered yeast cytosolic
iron as shown by the induction of reporter constructs
for a component of the high-afﬁnity iron transport system
(fet3-lacz), which is transcriptionally activated by reduced
levels of ‘free’ cytosolic iron (supplementary figure 3c).
induction of ferritin resulted in the presence of iron-loaded
ferritin as deﬁned by prussian blue staining using nondena-
turing gels (supplementary figure 3d). thus, expression of
h þ l ferritin chains in yeast results in the synthesis of ferritin
capable of binding iron.
if yeast that have accumulated ferritin are placed under
conditions in which ferritin synthesis is prevented by the
addition of glucose, ferritin levels remain high as long as cells
are incubated in iron-rich medium (figure 5a, closed circles).
in the absence of continued ferritin expression, induction
of the vacuolar iron transporter ccc1p led to a reduction
in ferritin levels (figure 5a, closed triangles). these results
show that
ferritin levels decrease under conditions that
promote low cytosolic iron. decreased ferritin levels occur
in cells that have compromised vacuolar proteolysis resulting
from a deletion in the vacuolar protease pep4, indicating
that ferritin is not degraded in the vacuole (data not shown).
addition of mg132, however, prevented ferritin loss, suggest-
ing that ferritin is degraded by the proteasome (figure 5b).
immunoprecipitation of ferritin from mg132 treated cells
showed the presence of ubiquitin on ferritin chains
(figure 5c). again, there is no evidence of polyubiquitina-
tion. these results indicate that loss of iron from ferritin leads
to ferritin ubiquitination and makes it unlikely that there is
a speciﬁc iron-sensitive e3 ubiquitin ligase.
discussion
there is substantial genetic and physiological data that
show that fpn is the iron exporter responsible for the entry
of iron into plasma (ganz and nemeth, 2006). expression
of fpn results in the loss of cellular iron including iron
stored in ferritin (nemeth et al, 2004). we show here that
fpn-mediated ferritin degradation occurs in the cytosol and
requires the activity of
iron
from ferritin occurs before ferritin degradation and does not
require ubiquitination. vertebrate ferritin chains expressed in
bacteria can assemble a ferritin nanocage in the absence of
iron (santambrogio et al, 1993). entry of iron into apoferritin
can occur in vitro and depends primarily on the ferroxidase
activity of the h-chain (lawson et al, 1989). thus, both
ferritin assembly and iron incorporation are intrinsic proper-
the proteasome. release of
proteasome-mediated ferritin degradation
i de domenico et al
figure 5 human ferritin expressed in s. cerevisiae is degraded by
the proteasome. strains of wild type (wt), dccc1, erg6-2 cells were
transformed with plasmids pgal, pgal-l-ferritin, pgal-h-ferritin
and pgal-h þ l-ferritin. (a) dccc1/pgal-h þ l cells were trans-
formed with a plasmid containing a methionine regulated ccc1
(pmet3ccc1). cells were grown in medium with galactose for 20 h,
washed and incubated in galactose (k), glucose with 10  methio-
nine (n), glucose (j) or glucose without methionine (.) for 10 h.
cells were then harvested and ferritin levels determined by elisa.
error bars represent the standard deviation from three different
experiments in duplicate. the absence of methionine leads to
expression of the vacuolar iron transporter ccc1p. (b) erg6-2 and
erg6-2 pgal-h þ l strains were grown in medium with galactose
and 250 mm feso4 for 24 h. cells were then washed and incubated
in galactose or glucose in the absence or presence of 50 mm mg132
for 7 h. (c) cells were then harvested, ferritin levels determined by
elisa and immunoprecipitated using anti-ferritin antibodies and
the immunoprecipitate examined for the presence of ubiquitin by
western analysis. cells with the erg6-2 allele permit the entry of
mg132 (lee and goldberg, 1996).
ties of ferritin. depletion of cytosolic iron in vivo, either
through the action of fpn, which exports iron from cells, or
by ccc1p, which imports iron into the yeast vacuole, leads to
the loss of ferritin iron. the simplest interpretation of these
ﬁndings is that iron entry and exit from ferritin is the result
of an equilibrium based on the concentration of cytosolic
iron. the observation that iron can exit ferritin in yeast, an
organism that has no endogenous ferritin, suggests that
speciﬁc machinery for ferritin iron release is not required.
given the presence of a reductant
that converts fe(iii)
iron release from ferritin may
within ferritin to fe(ii),
& 2006 european molecular biology organization
the embo journal vol 25 | no 22 | 2006 5401
proteasome-mediated ferritin degradation
i de domenico et al
be an autonomous property of
ferritin, supporting the
view that iron exits through pores in the ferritin nanocage
(jin et al, 2001).
our data suggest that iron release from ferritin ‘marks’ the
ferritin shell, designating it as a substrate for ubiquitination.
we did not observe polyubiquitination of ferritin prior to
ferritin degradation. monoubiquitinated proteins are not
normally recognized by the proteasome. we have not proven
that monoubiquitination is a signal for proteasomal degra-
dation. it may be that monoubiquitination is a signal for
disassembly of ferritin nanocages and that the same modiﬁ-
cations of ferritin that lead to monoubiquitination can also
signal proteasomal degradation. several reports have indi-
cated that oxidized proteins including oxidized ferritin can be
degraded by the proteasome (rudeck et al, 2000; mehlhase
et al, 2005), without being polyubiquitinated (shringarpure
et al, 2003). the machinery that mediates ferritin disassem-
bly is not speciﬁc to mammalian cells but is found in yeast.
there is a robust literature showing that monoubiquitination
of many membrane proteins is a signal for their internaliza-
tion into the multivesicular body (for a review, see hicke
and dunn, 2003). monoubiquitination of histones is asso-
ciated with transcriptional regulation in higher eukaryotes
(shilatifard, 2006) and with uv dna repair (matsushita
et al, 2005). in these instances, monoubiquitination is not a
prerequisite for degradation but rather is involved in targeting
complexes that then perform enzymatic activities. our data
show that monoubiquitination of ferritin leads to its disas-
sembly, suggesting that monoubiquitination may function
in the disassembly of other supermolecular structures. the
h-chain of ferritin contains 12 lysine residues and it is not
clear which of the residues is ubiquitinated, or whether all
of the residues are potential ubiquitination sites.
these results show that under conditions in which cyto-
solic iron is reduced by export (either into yeast vacuoles or
out of mammalian cells by fpn), ferritin degradation occurs
by the proteasome. the cytosol of yeast and mammalian cells
would certainly contain high levels of reducing agents (glu-
tathione, nadph). evidence suggesting that cytosolic iron is
in the form of fe2 þ is that reduced iron is the substrate for
both vacuolar storage (li et al, 2001) and mitochondrial heme
synthesis in yeast (lange et al, 1999) and ferritin storage in
mammalian cells (lawson et al, 1989). there is substantial
data, including results shown here that indicate that ferritin
can be degraded in lysosomes. many of the studies that show
ferritin degraded by lysosomes utilize conditions that may
affect autophagy, such as amino-acid starvation (ollinger and
roberg, 1997) or bacterial infection (larson et al, 2004). the
other condition that leads to lysosomal ferritin degradation
is addition of iron chelators such as dfo, a bacterial side-
rophore (bridges, 1987; kidane et al, 2006). the ability of
dfo to cross mammalian membranes is a subject of debate,
and dfo may enter cells by endocytosis,
localizing in
lysosomes (lloyd et al, 1991). dfo is used as a therapeutic
agent to manage iron overload disease in humans. dfo
cannot be absorbed through the intestine and must be
injected. the concentration that
is used to iron-deprive
cultured cells (100 mm) is 10–20 times the maximal therapeu-
tic plasma concentration of dfo (4–7 mm) (porter, 2001),
suggesting that dfo may be exhibiting a pharmacological
effect on cultured cells, perhaps by inducing the lysosomal
accumulation of iron. as shown here, there are circumstances
in which dfo induced ferritin loss may also occur by
proteasomal degradation. the observation that there is plas-
ticity in the route in which ferritin can be degraded, cytosol
versus lysosome, may explain pharmacological studies in
which inhibitors of both lysosomal and proteasomal activities
can affect ferritin degradation (kwok and richardson, 2004).
expression of fpn can deplete cells of ferritin iron, while
inhibition of fpn activity results in increased ferritin levels,
suggesting that iron accumulation in ferritin may be a default
pathway occurring when cytosolic iron levels are high. an
equilibrium model of iron entry and exit into ferritin provides
an explanation for regulation of intestinal iron uptake. iron
transported into intestinal absorptive cells can either accu-
mulate in ferritin or be transported by fpn across the
basolateral membrane into plasma. the accumulation of
intestinal
ferritin has been referred to as the ‘mucosal
block’, as this iron is lost from the body when the short-
lived absorptive cells are lost from the intestine (granick,
1951; crosby, 1966). ferritin iron accumulation is inversely
correlated with fpn, as expression of fpn can deplete ferritin
iron by lowering cytosolic iron and by exporting iron from
cells. fpn level may be one of the major determinants in
regulating whether iron is stored in ferritin or made bioavail-
able. accumulation of ferritin iron in mucosal cells (or in
macrophages recycling red blood cell iron) may only occur in
the absence of iron export and therefore may be a default
pathway. cell surface fpn is regulated by hepcidin as binding
of this peptide to fpn induces degradation of the fpn–
hepcidin complex (nemeth et al, 2004). hepcidin produced in
response to hepatic iron stores or
inﬂammation can
ultimately determine if cells export iron into plasma or
store iron in ferritin.
materials and methods
cells and media
hek293t-fpn cells, a stable cell line in which fpn-gfp is regulated
by the ecdysone promoter, were grown as described (nemeth et al,
2004). fpn-gfp expression was induced by addition of 10 mm
ponasterone a (ag scientiﬁc inc., san diego, ca). fm3a and ts85
were grown in rpmi 1640 (gibco/invitrogen, grand island, ny)
with 5% fetal bovine serum as described (ikehata et al, 1997). the
saccharomyces cerevisiae strains used in this study were derived
from w303 background and have been used in previous studies
(li et al, 2001). wild-type dy150, dccc1, dpep4 and erg6-2 strains
were transformed with pgal, pgal-l-ferritin, pgal-h-ferritin and
pgal-h þ l-ferritin vectors. the erg6-2 strain was used as it permits
the entry of the proteasome inhibitor mg132 (lee and goldberg,
1996). cells were grown in yeast nitrogen base synthetic medium
(cm) with supplements as needed.
western blot analysis and immunoprecipitation
cellular proteins were extracted with 150 mm nacl, 10 mm edta,
10 mm tris (ph7.4), 1% triton x-100, a protease inhibitor cocktail
(roche, palo alto, ca) and 50 mm n-ethylmaleimide (sigma,
st louis, mo). total protein concentrations were determined
using bca reagent (pierce, rockford, il). protein samples were
separated on 4–20% gels (tris–glycine) (biorad, hercules, ca) and
transferred on hybond-ecl (amersham biosciences, piscataway,
nj). ferritin was detected using rabbit anti-ferritin antibody
(1:1000, sigma, st louis, mo), with peroxidase conjugated
goat anti-rabbit igg as the secondary antibody (1:10 000, jackson
immunoresearch, west grove, pa). ubiquitination was detected
using mouse anti-ubiquitin (1:1000, covance, berkeley, ca) with
peroxidase conjugated goat anti-mouse igg as the secondary
antibody (1:10 000, jackson immunoresearch, west grove, pa).
chemiluminescent method was used for detection (western light-
ning, perkin elmer, boston, ma). ferritin was immunoprecipitated
5402
the embo journal vol 25 | no 22 | 2006
& 2006 european molecular biology organization
proteasome-mediated ferritin degradation
i de domenico et al
using rabbit anti-ferritin antibody (1:250, sigma, st louis, mo)
and protein a/g-agarose (santa cruz biotechnology, santa cruz,
ca) at 41c overnight. samples were eluted from beads using 2 
sds–page sample buffer with b-mercaptoethanol. prussian blue
staining of ferritin was performed as described (kim et al, 2003).
594 conjugated goat anti-mouse antibody (1:750) (molecular
probes, eugene, or) for 60 min at room temperature. cells were
visualized using an epiﬂuorescence microscope (olympus inc.,
melville, ny) with a  100 oil immersion objective. images were
acquired using magnaﬁre analysis software (optronix, goleta, ca).
ferritin measurement
hek293t-fpn cells were incubated with fac (10 mm fe) and
induced with 10 mm ponasterone a. cellular protein was extracted
as described above. ferritin levels from mammalian extracts were
determined by an elisa (laguna scientiﬁc, laguna, ca), according
to the manufacturer’s instructions. protein concentrations were
determined by bicinchoninic acid assay (pierce, rockford, il).
ferritin levels from yeast extracts were determined by an elisa as
described (erhardt et al, 2004) using rabbit anti-ferritin antibody
0.05 mg/well. error bars represent the standard deviation from
three different experiments in duplicate.
tf( 59fe)2 preparation
human apotf (sigma, st louis, mo) was iron loaded using either
59fe (new england nuclear, boston, ma) or ferric chloride as
described (van renswoude et al, 1982). cells were incubated with
1.0 10 7 m tf(59fe)2.
size exclusion chromatography
cellular protein was extracted as described above and loaded on a
superdex 200 fplc column (amersham pharmacia, piscataway,
nj) that was standardized using thyroglobulin (330 kda), alcohol
dehydrogenase (150 kda), bsa (67 kda), ovalbumin (40 kda),
and cytochrome c (12.4 kda, sigma). fractions were collected and
analyzed for ferritin by elisa or western blot.
immunoﬂuorescence
cells were ﬁxed with 3.7% formaldehyde, permeabilized in pbs
containing 1% bovine serum albumin and 0.1% saponin and
incubated in mouse anti-egf-receptor
(neomarkers,
fremont, ca) for 60 min at room temperature, followed by alexa
(1:100)
percoll gradients and b-n-acetylhexoseaminidase analysis
cells were homogenized in homogenization buffer
(250 mm
sucrose, 20 mm hepes, 0.5 mm egta, ph 7.2, koh) using a ball-
bearing homogenizer. homogenates were centrifuged at 800 g for
5 min at 41c to obtain a postnuclear supernatant, which was
fractionated on 30% percoll (ward et al, 1990). gradients were
fractionated and b-n-acetylhexoseaminidase activity was assayed as
described (lamb et al, 1983) and ferritin measured by elisa.
measurement of iron by atomic absorption spectroscopy
log phase cells were collected and washed by centrifugation with
50 mm tris–hcl, ph 6.5, 10 mm edta. cell pellets were digested in
200 ml of 5:2 nitric:perchloric acid at 801c for 1 h. after digestion,
the samples were diluted to 1.0 ml with deionized water and then
ﬂamed in a perkinelmer life sciences inductively coupled plasma
atomic absorption spectrometer. all samples were measured in
duplicate and normalized by total cell number.
supplementary data
supplementary data are available at the embo journal online
(http://www.embojournal.org).
acknowledgements
we thank dr s torti for providing cdna for human h and l ferritin
chains, drs jp kushner, jd phillips, r ajioka and m rechsteiner for
helpful comments, dr m rechsteiner for fm3a and ts85 cell lines,
dr martin bard for providing the erg6-2 strain and dr t ganz for
providing hepcidin. this work was supported by nih grants dk
070947 and dk 30534 to jk.
references
bridges kr (1987) ascorbic acid inhibits lysosomal autophagy of
ferritin. j biol chem 262: 14773–14778
bridges kr, hoffman ke (1986) the effects of ascorbic acid on the
intracellular metabolism of iron and ferritin. j biol chem 261:
14273–14277
crosby wh (1966) mucosal block. an evaluation of concepts
relating to control of iron absorption. semin hematol 3: 299–313
erhardt jg, estes je, pfeiffer cm, biesalski hk, craft ne (2004)
combined measurement of ferritin, soluble transferrin receptor,
retinol binding protein, and c-reactive protein by an inexpensive,
sensitive, and simple sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay technique. j nutr 134: 3127–3132
finley d, ciechanover a, varshavsky a (1984) thermolability of
ubiquitin-activating enzyme from the mammalian cell cycle
mutant ts85. cell 37: 43–55
ganz t, nemeth e (2006) iron imports. iv. hepcidin and regulation
of body iron metabolism. am j physiol gastrointest liver physiol
290: g199–g203
granick s (1951) structure and physiological functions of ferritin.
physiol rev 31: 489–511
harrison pm, hoy tg, macara ig, hoare rj (1974) ferritin iron
uptake and release. structure–function relationships. biochem j
143: 445–451
hicke l, dunn r (2003) regulation of membrane protein transport
by ubiquitin and ubiquitin-binding proteins. annu rev cell dev
biol 19: 141–172
ikehata h, kaneda s, yamao f, seno t, ono t, hanaoka f (1997)
incubation at the nonpermissive temperature induces deﬁciencies
in uv resistance and mutagenesis in mouse mutant cells expres-
sing a temperature-sensitive ubiquitin-activating enzyme (e1).
mol cell biol 17: 1484–1489
jin w, takagi h, pancorbo b, theil ec (2001) ‘opening’ the ferritin
pore for iron release by mutation of conserved amino acids at
interhelix and loop sites. biochemistry 40: 7525–7532
kidane tz, sauble e, linder mc (2006) release of iron from
ferritin requires lysosomal activity. am j physiol cell physiol
291: c445–c455
kim hj, kim hm, kim jh, ryu ks, park sm, jahng ky, yang ms,
kim dh (2003) expression of heteropolymeric ferritin improves
iron storage in saccharomyces cerevisiae. appl environ microbiol
69: 1999–2005
konijn am, glickstein h, vaisman b, meyron-holtz eg, slotki in,
cabantchik zi (1999) the cellular labile iron pool and intracel-
lular ferritin in k562 cells. blood 94: 2128–2134
lamb je, ray f, ward jh, kushner
kwok jc, richardson dr (2004) examination of the mechanism(s)
involved in doxorubicin-mediated iron accumulation in ferritin:
studies using metabolic inhibitors, protein synthesis inhibitors,
and lysosomotropic agents. mol pharmacol 65: 181–195
jp, kaplan j
(1983)
internalization and subcellular localization of transferrin and
transferrin receptors in hela cells. j biol chem 258: 8751–8758
lange h, kispal g, lill r (1999) mechanism of iron transport to the
site of heme synthesis inside yeast mitochondria. j biol chem
274: 18989–18996
larson ja, howie hl, so m (2004) neisseria meningitidis
accelerates ferritin degradation in host epithelial cells to yield
an essential iron source. mol microbiol 53: 807–820
lawson dm, treffry a, artymiuk pj, harrison pm, yewdall sj,
luzzago a, cesareni g, levi s, arosio p (1989) identiﬁcation of
the ferroxidase centre in ferritin. febs lett 254: 207–210
lee dh, goldberg al (1996) selective inhibitors of the proteasome-
dependent and vacuolar pathways of protein degradation in
saccharomyces cerevisiae. j biol chem 271: 27280–27284
li l, chen os, mcvey ward d, kaplan j (2001) ccc1 is a transporter
that mediates vacuolar iron storage in yeast. j biol chem 276:
29515–29519
liu x, theil ec (2005) ferritins: dynamic management of biological
iron and oxygen chemistry. acc chem res 38: 167–175
& 2006 european molecular biology organization
the embo journal vol 25 | no 22 | 2006 5403
proteasome-mediated ferritin degradation
i de domenico et al
lloyd jb, cable h, rice-evans c (1991) evidence that desferriox-
amine cannot enter cells by passive diffusion. biochem pharmacol
41: 1361–1363
matsushita n, kitao h, ishiai m, nagashima n, hirano s, okawa k,
ohta t, yu ds, mchugh pj, hickson id, venkitaraman ar,
kurumizaka h, takata m (2005) a fancd2-monoubiquitin fusion
reveals hidden functions of fanconi anemia core complex in dna
repair. mol cell 19: 841–847
mehlhase j, sandig g, pantopoulos k, grune t (2005) oxidation-
induced ferritin turnover in microglial cells: role of proteasome.
free radical biol med 38: 276–285
mertz jr, theil ec (1983) subunit dimers in sheep spleen
apoferritin. the effect on iron storage. j biol chem 258:
11719–11726
nemeth e, tuttle ms, powelson j, vaughn mb, donovan a, ward
dm, ganz t, kaplan j (2004) hepcidin regulates cellular iron
efﬂux by binding to ferroportin and inducing its internalization.
science 306: 2090–2093
ollinger k, roberg k (1997) nutrient deprivation of cultured rat
hepatocytes increases the desferrioxamine-available iron pool
and augments the sensitivity to hydrogen peroxide. j biol chem
272: 23707–23711
peto te, rutherford tr, thompson jl, weatherall dj (1983) iron
metabolism in murine erythroleukaemic cells. br j haematol 54:
623–631
porter jb (2001) deferoxamine pharmacokinetics. semin hematol
38: 63–68
radisky dc, kaplan j (1998) iron in cytosolic ferritin can be
recycled through lysosomal degradation in human ﬁbroblasts.
biochem j 336: 201–205
rudeck m, volk t, sitte n, grune t (2000) ferritin oxidation in vitro:
implication of iron release and degradation by the 20s protea-
some. iubmb life 49: 451–456
sakaida i, kyle me, farber jl (1990) autophagic degradation of protein
generates a pool of ferric iron required for the killing of cultured
hepatocytes by an oxidation stress. mol pharmacol 37: 435–442
santambrogio p, levi s, cozzi a, rovida e, albertini a, arosio p
(1993) production and characterization of recombinant hetero-
polymers of human ferritin h and l chains. j biol chem 268:
12744–12748
shilatifard a (2006) chromatin modiﬁcations by methylation and
ubiquitination: implications in the regulation of gene expression.
annu rev biochem 75: 243–269
shin ym, kwon th, kim ks, chae ks, kim dh, kim jh, yang ms
(2001) enhanced iron uptake of saccharomyces cerevisiae by
heterologous expression of a tadpole ferritin gene. appl environ
microbiol 67: 1280–1283
shringarpure r, grune t, mehlhase j, davies kj (2003) ubiquitin
conjugation is not required for the degradation of oxidized
proteins by proteasome. j biol chem 278: 311–318
takagi h, shi d, ha y, allewell nm, theil ec (1998) localized
unfolding at the junction of three ferritin subunits. a mechanism
for iron release? j biol chem 273: 18685–18688
van renswoude j, bridges kr, harford jb, klausner rd (1982)
receptor-mediated endocytosis of transferrin and the uptake of fe
in k562 cells: identiﬁcation of a nonlysosomal acidic compart-
ment. proc natl acad sci usa 79: 6186–6190
ward dm, hackenyos dp, kaplan j (1990) fusion of sequentially
internalized vesicles in alveolar macrophages. j cell biol 110:
1013–1022
5404
the embo journal vol 25 | no 22 | 2006
& 2006 european molecular biology organization