ultrastructural pathology, 30:301–307, 2006
copyright # informa healthcare
issn: 0191-3123 print=1521-0758 online
doi: 10.1080/01913120600820575
gastric hepatoid adenocarcinoma with
autophagy-related necrosis-like tumor
cell death: report of a case
r. a. caruso, f. basile,
f. fedele, v. zuccala` ,
c. crisafulli, m. g. fracassi,
e. quattrocchi, and a. venuti
departimento di patologia
umana, policlinico universitario,
messina, italy
v. fabiano
vi clinica chirurgica, policlinico
universitario, messina, italy
abstract a case of hepatoid adenocarcinoma of the stomach is pre-
sented. the characteristic features of the tumor are summarized on the basis
of the authors’ experience and the literature. ultrastructural examination
revealed patchy condensations of chromatin throughout the nucleus sugges-
tive of necrosis-like programmed cell death (pcd). these nuclear alterations
were associated with the occurrence of vacuoles and lipofuscins, conferring
an autophagic phenotype to this pcd. thus, the case reported here provides
an example of autophagic-related necrosis-like pcd. alternative pcds are
reviewed and their morphologic distinction is discussed.
keywords autophagic cell death, gastric carcinoma, hepatoid differentiation,
ultrastructure
a delicate balance between cell division and programmed cell death (pcd)
is required for the maintenance of tissue homeostasis. one of the more
restraining classifications of pcd is based on the nuclear morphology and
divides pcds into classical apoptosis, apoptosis-like pcd, and necrosis-like
pcd characterized by crescent-like, lumpy, or absence of chromatin con-
densation, respectively [1–3].
many forms of pcd, including autophagy [4, 5], paraptosis [6], and dark
cell death [7], result in a necrosis-like pcd [1, 3]. autophagy is a critical pro-
cess responsible for degradation of the cytoplasmic components, in which
the autophagosome sequesters these materials and subsequently fuses with
the lysosome, resulting in degradation of the contents by lysosomal hydro-
lases [8]. the autophagosome is a double-membrane structure containing
undigested cytoplasmic material including organelles, while the autolyso-
some is a single membrane structure containing cytoplasmic components
at various stages of degradation. since clear differentiation between autop-
hagosomes and autolysosomes is sometimes difficult, these structures are
often generalized as ‘‘autophagic vacuoles’’
[8]. autophagic cell death is
defined as a type of cell death that occurs without chromatin condensation,
accompained by dilation of perinuclear endoplasmic reticulum and
the presence of vacuoles containing digested material and=or typical
301
received 25 october 2005; accepted
16 december 2005.
this research was supported by grants
from the italian ministry of university
and research (murst) to the
department of human pathology,
medicine university, messina.
address correspondence to prof.
rosario a. caruso, departimento di
patologia umana, policlinico
universitario, i-98125 messina, italy.
e-mail: rosariocaruso@tin.it
ultrastruct pathol downloaded from informahealthcare.com by university of queensland on 06/16/14for personal use only.
double-membrane autophagic vacuoles [2]. accord-
ing to the recommendations of the nomenclature
committee on cell death [2], however, the term sim-
ply describes cell death with autophagy. autophagic
profiles identified by electron microscopy have been
associated with cell death in cultured tumor cells [4,
5, 9, 10]. a review of the literature revealed only few
reports showing in vivo morphologic features of
autophagy in human tumors [11, 12].
hepatoid adenocarcinoma is a distinct subtype of
alpha-fetoprotein (afp)-producing adenocarcinoma
with foci of hepatic differentiation [13, 14]. this
tumor rarely arises in the stomach. moreover, hepa-
toid adenocarcinomas have an aggressive behavior
due to extensive venous permeation and uncontrol-
lable blood-borne metastases [15]. recent research
has elucidated the pathological characteristics of gas-
tric hepatoid adenocarcinoma, and a constellation of
architectural and cytological features, including ultra-
structural findings, is essential for correct diagnosis
[13–16]. the pas-positive, diastase-resistant hyaline
globules are prominent cytoplasmic structures in
hepatoid carcinomas [13–15]. similar globules have
been identified in numerous types of malignant and
benign tumors as well as in nonneoplastic tissue
[17, 18]. ultrastructurally, they are surrounded by a
limiting membrane and are interpreted as phagosome-
like structures [17, 18].
we describe a case of gastric hepatoid adenocarci-
noma, with an emphasis on the previously unre-
ported ultrastructural features of autophagy-related
necrosis-like pcd.
case report
a 73-year-old man presented with epigastric pain
and severe weight
loss. endoscopy and biopsy
revealed the presence of a malignant epithelial neo-
plasm in the gastric antrum. a computed tomogra-
phy scan showed no intrahepatic mass. a partial
gastrectomy with perigastric lymph node dissection
was performed. at laparotomy, neither liver metasta-
sis nor peritoneal dissemination of the tumor was
recognized. preoperative serum afp levels were
not determined. serum afp level on postoperative
day 15 was 140.4 ng=ml. the patient developed
widespread metastases and died of disease 16 months
after initial presentation.
materials and methods
for light microscopy, the specimens were fixed in
10% formalin for 24 h at room temperature and
embedded in paraffin wax. sections were stained
with hematoxylin–eosin, giemsa, periodic acid–schiff
(pas) with and without prior diastase digestion, and
alcian blue ph 2.5–pas (ab-pas).
immunohisto-
chemical evaluation was performed with commer-
cially available antibodies and according to standard
protocols. the antisera used for
immunohisto-
chemistry and their working dilutions are given in
table 1.
tumor tissue was also obtained in the operating
immediate fixation in 3% phosphate-
room for
buffered glutaraldeyde, ph 7.4, and postfixed in
1% osmium tetroxide. semithin araldite embedded
sections were stained with giemsa’s reagent
for
selection of fields. thin sections were double-stained
with uranyl acetate and lead citrate;
they were
then examined and photographed in a zeiss em
902 electron microscope (carl zeiss, oberkochen,
germany).
classification of cell death
leist and ja¨a¨ttela¨ [1, 3] proposed a descriptive
model that classifies cell death into 4 subclasses,
according to their nuclear morphology. classical
apoptosis is characterized by chromatin condensed
to compact and almost geometric figures. apoptosis-
like pcd shows less compact,
lumpy chromatin
masses. in contrast, in necrosis-like pcd no chroma-
tin condensation is observed, with at best, chromatin
clustering to loose speckles, whereas necrosis is
characterized by cytoplasmic swelling and cell mem-
brane rupture.
table 1 antibodies used for the immunohistochemical
analysis
source
dilution
alpha-fetoprotein (afp)
hep par1
chromogranin a
chorionic gonadotropin
carcinoembryonic antigen (cea)
monoclonal cea
dako
m dako
dako
dako
dako
m dako
1=50
1=80
1=100
1=200
1=800
1=100
note. m, monoclonal antibody; p, polyclonal antibody; dako,
copenhagen, denmark.
r. a. caruso et al.
302
ultrastruct pathol downloaded from informahealthcare.com by university of queensland on 06/16/14for personal use only.
pathological findings
gross examination of the specimen revealed a
fungating neoplasm (borrmannâ€™s type ii) measuring
6 cm in diameter involving the antrum from the lesser
curvature to the anterior wall. the cut surface
showed a well-demarcated, grayish-white tumor
involving the entire thickness of the gastric wall. a
light microscopy examination revealed a tumor
invading mucosal, submucosal, muscular, and sub-
serosal layers of the stomach. eight lymph nodes of
the lesser curvature contained massive metastasis
(pt2, pn2, clinical stage iiia conforming to the
ptnm system).
histologically,
the tumor cells showed a solid
growth pattern. they were polygonal, and had abun-
dant eosinophilic cytoplasm with centrally situated
nuclei, resembling hepatocellular carcinoma cells
(figure 1).
intracytoplasmic lumina with brush
border were sometimes seen in the hepatoid compo-
nent (figure 2a). round homogeneous and eosino-
philic hyaline globules were found intracellularly
(figure 2b). in other areas, the eosinophilic tumor
cells were arranged into small, round tubules. focal
invasion into blood vessels was seen. no helicobac-
ter pylori gastritis was observed.
intracytoplasmic mucin was not
histochemically,
lumina and cell surfaces were
found. glandular
occasionally positive with both pas and ab stains.
hyaline globules were pas-positive diastase-resistant.
figure 1 the tumor is composed of large polygonal cells with
abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm, which proliferate in a sheet-like
pattern. h & e, 3100.
figure 2 (a) hepatoid neoplastic cell showing intracyto-
plasmic lumen with suggestion of a brush border (arrowhead).
h & e, 3800. (b) intracytoplasmic hyaline globules. h & e, 3800.
303
autophagic cell death in gastric carcinoma
ultrastruct pathol downloaded from informahealthcare.com by university of queensland on 06/16/14for personal use only.
figure 3 alpha-fetoprotein-positive cells are scattered in the
tumor cell nests, 3100.
figure 4 immunoperoxidase staining for polyclonal cea
exhibited a canalicular pattern within the hepatoid areas, 3200.
immunohistochemically, hepatoid cells were
stained for heppar1 and showed a cytoplasmic
granular pattern for afp (figure 3). polyclonal
cea-positive, monoclonal cea-negative membra-
nous, canalicular
structures were identified in
hepatoid cells (figure 4), while the glandular compo-
nent was positively stained by both polyclonal and
monoclonal anti-cea antibodies,
in luminal and
cytoplasmic patterns. the tumor was negative for
chromogranin a and human chorionic gonadotropin.
by electron microscopy, the neoplastic cells were
arranged in tightly packed clusters, with little inter-
cellular space.
intracytoplasmic lumina equipped
with actin-cored microvilli and containing an
electron-dense material were observed (figure 5).
there was moderate to marked chromatin conden-
sation throughout the nucleus (figures 6a, 7). these
nuclear changes were associated with dilation of
nuclear envelope, empty cytoplasmic vacuoles,
lipid-like material, and lipofuscins (figure 6). lipid-
like material was observed as round, gray vacuoles
figure 5 intracytoplasmic lumen containing electron-dense
material and long microvilli with an actin core, 38000.
r. a. caruso et al.
304
ultrastruct pathol downloaded from informahealthcare.com by university of queensland on 06/16/14for personal use only.
figure 6 (a) lipofuscin granule in the cytoplasm of a tumor cell (large arrowheads). vacuolar dilatations are observed in the space
between the inner and the outer part of the nuclear envelope (arrows). in nucleus irregular granular electron-light material is present (small
arrowhead), 36000. (b) large lipofuscin granule containing granular, lipid-like material, membranous structures, and myelinoid figures.
swollen mitochondria are also seen, 320,000.
containing slightly irregular granularity (figure 8).
lipofuscin granules appeared as irregularly shaped
bodies containing granular, lipid-like material, mem-
branous structures, and myelinoid figures (figure
6b). chromatin condensation into dense granular
caps under the nuclear membrane as well as apopto-
tic bodies was not seen.
discussion
we describe this case as a primary gastric carci-
noma because the only lesion compatible with a pri-
mary tumor was in the stomach and metastases were
distributed to regional
lymph nodes. the tumor
described here is classified as hepatoid carcinoma
for a series of morphological, histochemical, ultra-
structural, and immunohistochemical features [13–
15]. the histologic appearance of the tumor was a
mixture of tubular adenocarcinoma cells and hepa-
toid neoplastic cells. morphologically, the hepatocel-
lular features observed were the solid growth pattern
of eosinophilic tumor cells having a large, round
nucleus with a prominent nucleolus. histochemi-
cally, ab-pas staining showed no mucin granules
in the cytoplasm of tumor cells, as also confirmed
by electron microscopy. immunoreactivity for hep-
par1, afp, and a striking membranous, canalicular-
like immunostaining pattern for polyclonal cea all
indicate hepatocellular differentiation within this
gastric tumor [15].
the precise role of autophagy in cancer develop-
ment, progression, and response to therapy is not
well understood. autophagy is crucial for cell adap-
tation and survival under extreme conditions. degra-
dation of intracellular macromolecules or damaged
organelles provides the energy required for minimal
functioning when nutrients are scarce [19].
cell
therefore,
activated in
advanced stages of cancer to guarantee survival of
cancer cells under extreme conditions, such as the
restricted access of cells located in the inner areas
of solid tumors to nutrients. like apoptosis, however,
autophagic cell death was found to be suppressed in
tumors. beclin 1—a mammalian gene
malignant
could be
autophagy
305
autophagic cell death in gastric carcinoma
ultrastruct pathol downloaded from informahealthcare.com by university of queensland on 06/16/14for personal use only.
the other hand, expression of oncogenically mutated
ras gene causes autophagic degeneration in gastric
cancer cell lines [5]. thus, autophagy may be due
to gene activation or, alternatively, it may reflect a
cellular response to stress in low-vascularized areas
of tumors.
lipofuscin is a mixture of substances, mainly of
protein and lipid origin (30–70% and 20–50%,
respectively) [24]. intralysosomal accumulation of
lipofuscin within postmitotic cells is one of the most
prominent signs of aging. however, deposition of
lipofuscin also forms independently of age due to
enhanced reparative autophagocytosis or delayed
lysosomal degradation in a number of pathological
conditions, such as malnutrition, lysosomal storage
diseases, and tumors [25]. therefore, despite differ-
ent etiology, the mechanisms of lysosomal pigment
formation and its composition are basically the same
in aging and disease [25].
electron microscopy disclosed nuclear chromatin
condensation in tumor cells suggestive of necrosis-
like pcd [1, 3]. in contrast to classical apoptosis,
the chromatin is not condensed into compact and
almost geometric figures under the nuclear mem-
brane [23], but small patches of condensed chromatin
are spread throughout the nucleus. the nuclear and
cytoplasmic changes do not seem to fit the typical
description of classical necrosis that is characterized
by cytoplasmic swelling and cell membrane rupture
[4]. the nuclear changes of tumor cells were often
found in association with autophagy including
cytoplasmic vacuolization,
lipid-like bodies, and
[2, 4, 25]. taken togheter,
lipofuscin granules
these ultrastructural data suggest
the presence of
autophagy-related necrosis-like pcd in the tumor
studied.
in conclusion, examination by ultrastructure has
clarified the nature of the cell death in this tumor
and is a valuable means to differentiating between
necrosis and various types of pcd. the constellation
of ultrastructural findings such as patchy condensa-
tions of chromatin throughout
the nucleus, cyto-
and lipofuscin granules
plasmic vacuolization,
suggests a autophagy-related necrosis-like pcd in
our case of gastric hepatoid adenocarcinoma. to
assess the potential correlation between autophagy
and gene activation in gastric carcinoma, further
morphologic, molecular, and biological
investiga-
tions are needed.
figure 7 patches of condensed chromatin are spread
throughout the nucleus of tumor cell, 36000.
capable of inducing autophagy—was found to be
monoallelically deleted in a high percentage of
ovarian, breast, and prostate cancer [20]. in rat liver
carcinogenesis models, autophagic activity is mildly
reduced at a preneoplastic stage and becomes more
substantially diminished in primary hepatocellular
tumor cells [21]. furthermore, animals with reduced
levels of beclin 1 display a pronounced increase in
epithelial and hematopoietic malignancies [22]. on
figure 8 reticulum-bound lipid-like vacuoles containing a
slightest irregular granularity are present in the cytoplasm of
tumor cell, 38000.
r. a. caruso et al.
306
ultrastruct pathol downloaded from informahealthcare.com by university of queensland on 06/16/14for personal use only.
references
1. leist m, ja¨ a¨ ttela¨ m. four deaths and a funeral: from caspases to alter-
native mechanisms. nat rev mol cell biol. 2001;2:589–598.
2. kroemer g, el-deiry ws, golstein p, et al. classification of cell death:
recommendations of the nomenclature committee on cell death. cell
death differ. 2005;12:1463–1467.
3. kroemer g, ja¨ a¨ ttela¨ m. lysosomes and autophagy in cell death con-
trol. nat rev cancer. oct 20,2005;(epub ahead of print).
4. bursch w. the autophagosomal-lysosomal compartment in pro-
grammed cell death. cell death differ. 2001;8:569–581.
5. chi s, kitanaka c, noguchi k, et al. oncogenic ras triggers cell suicide
through the activation of a caspase-independent cell death program
in human cancer cells. oncogene. 1999;18:2281–2290.
6. sperandio s, de belle i, bredesen de. an alternative nonapoptotic
form of programmed cell death. proc natl acad sci usa. 2000;97:
14376–14381.
7. turmaine m, raza a, mahal a, mangiarini l, bates gp, davies sw.
nonapoptotic neurodegeneration in a transgenic mouse model of
huntigton’s disease. proc natl acad sci usa. 2000;97:8093–8097.
8. mizushima n. methods for monitoring autophagy. int j biochem cell
biol. 2004;36:2491–2502.
9. kondo y, kanzawa t, sawaya r, kondo s. the role of autophagy in
cancer development and response to therapy. nature rev cancer.
2005;5:726–734.
10. kitanaka c, kato k, sakurada k, et al. increased ras expression and
caspase-independent neuroblastoma cell death: possible mechanism
inst.
of spontaneous neuroblastoma regression.
2002;94:358–368.
j natl cancer
11. gozuacik d, kimchi a. autophagy as a cell death and tumor sup-
pressor mechanism. oncogene. 2004;23:2891–2906.
12. alva as, gultekin sh, baehrecke eh. autophagy in human tumors:
cell survival or death? cell death differ. 2004;11:1046–1048.
13. ishikura h, fukasawa y, ogasawara k, natori t, tsukada y, aizawa m.
an afp-producing gastric carcinoma with features of hepatic differ-
entiation: a case report. cancer. 1985;56:840–848.
14. ishikura h, kirimoto k, shamoto m, et al. hepatoid adenocarcinomas
of the stomach: an analysis of seven cases. cancer. 1986;58:119–
126.
15. ishikura h, kishimoto t, adachi h, kakuta y, yoshiki t. gastrointes-
tinal hepatoid adenocarcinoma: venous permeation and mimicry of
hepatocellular carcinoma. a report of 4 cases. histopathology.
1997;31:47–54.
16. caruso ra. hepatoid gastric adenocarcinoma: a histological and
immunohistochemical study of a case. eur j basic appl histochem.
1991;35:203–209.
17. ooi a, nakanishi
i, sakamoto n, et al. alpha-fetoprotein (afp)-
producing gastric carcinoma: is it hepatoid differentiation?. cancer.
1990;65:1741–1747.
18. papadimitriou jc, drachenberg cb, brenner ds, newkirk c, trump bf,
silverberg sg. ‘‘thanatosomes’’: a unifying morphogenetic concept
tumor hyaline globules related to apoptosis. hum pathol.
for
2000;31:1455–1465.
19. cuervo am. autophagy: in sickness and in health. trends cell biol.
2004;14:70–77.
20. liang xh, jackson s, seaman m, et al. induction of autophagy
and inhibition of tumorigenesis by beclin 1. nature. 1999;402:
672–676.
21. kisen go, tessitore l, costelli p, et al. reduced autophagic activity in
primary rat hepatocellular carcinoma and ascites hepatoma cells. car-
cinogenesis. 1993;14:2501–2505.
22. qu x, yu j, bhagat g, et al. promotion of tumorigenesis by hetero-
zygous disruption of the beclin 1 autophagy gene. j clin invest.
2003;112:1809–1820.
23. wyllie ah, morris rg, smith al, dunlop d. chromatin cleavage in
apoptosis: association with condensed chromatin morphology and
j pathol. 1984;142:
dependence on macromolecular synthesis.
67–77.
24. terman a, brunk ut. lipofuscin.
int
j biochem cell biol.
2004;36:1400–1404.
25. brunk ut, terman a. the mitochondrial-lysosomal axis theory of
aging. eur j biochem. 2002;269:1996–2002.
307
autophagic cell death in gastric carcinoma
ultrastruct pathol downloaded from informahealthcare.com by university of queensland on 06/16/14for personal use only.