cell death and differentiation (2007) 14, 500–510
& 2007 nature publishing group all rights reserved 1350-9047/07 $30.00
www.nature.com/cdd
autophagy delays apoptotic death in breast cancer
cells following dna damage
mj abedin1, d wang2, ma mcdonnell1, u lehmann3 and a kelekar*,1,4
early signaling in camptothecin-treated mcf-7 cells followed an intrinsic pathway, but death was delayed and late events
exhibited few hallmarks of apoptosis. bh3-only proteins, such as noxa, puma and bimel, were activated and localized to
mitochondrial sites within 24 h following drug exposure. however, caspase activity was low and death was unaffected by
caspase inhibition. transmission electron micrographs showed the presence of large vacuoles in drug-treated cells. an
autophagic survival response has been attributed to mcf-7 cells following nutrient starvation or exposure to tamoxifen. here, we
show that autophagy also plays an important role in the delayed dna damage response. confocal microscopy revealed
colocalization of mitochondria with large autophagic vacuoles and inhibitors of autophagy increased mitochondrial
depolarization and caspase-9 activity, and accelerated cell death. furthermore, downregulation of autophagy proteins, beclin
1 and atg7, unmasked a caspase-dependent, apoptotic response to dna damage. we propose that a post-mitochondrial caspase
cascade is delayed as a result of early disposal of damaged mitochondria within autophagosomes. our data also suggest that the
use of autophagy as a means of delaying apoptosis or prolonging survival may be characteristic of noninvasive breast tumor
cells. these studies underscore a potential role for autophagy inhibitors in combination with conventional chemotherapeutic
drugs in early breast cancer therapy.
cell death and differentiation (2007) 14, 500–510. doi:10.1038/sj.cdd.4402039; published online 22 september 2006
a variety of stimuli, including growth factor deprivation, uv
or gamma radiation and dna-damaging agents activate an
intrinsic pathway of apoptosis involving the release of
cytochrome c (cyt c) and other mitochondrial apoptogenic
factors.1 this release promotes the assembly of a large
cytoplasmic complex called the ‘apoptosome’ and induces
caspase-9 to initiate an apoptotic caspase cascade beginning
with the activation of effector caspase-3 and culminating in the
the cell.2 the term ‘apoptosis’ has been used
death of
synonymously with programmed cell death (pcd), but it has
become evident in recent years that alternative, nonapoptotic
forms of cell suicide are also ‘programmed’. apoptosis, an
atp dependent process characterized by cell shrinkage,
activation of caspases and dna fragmentation, corresponds
to type i pcd, while autophagic cell death is classiﬁed as
type ii pcd.3 during autophagy, the cell encapsulates bulk
cytoplasm and whole organelles in double-membrane-bound
vacuoles or autophagosomes, degrading and recycling the
contents by metabolic catabolism.4
bcl-2 protein family proteins are strategic regulators of
the intrinsic pathway exerting their inﬂuence on the outer
mitochondrial membrane.5 the proapoptotic bh3-only pro-
teins of the bcl-2 family are components of signal transduction
pathways that convey the ‘death’ message to mitochondria.
these proteins can be activated in response to a variety of
death stimuli, including dna-damaging compounds.6,7 drugs
such as camptothecin (cpt) and etoposide, typically activate
the mitochondrial pathway by upregulating p53 expression.
apoptosis mediated by p53 involves both transcriptional
activation of a number of targets, including bcl-2 family genes
encoding puma, noxa, bim, bid and bax, as well as protein–
protein interactions with bcl-2 family members at mitochon-
drial sites.6,8,9
we were interested in identifying intermediates involved in
transducing proapoptotic signals following dna damage in
breast cancer cells using the mcf-7 cell line as a model. mcf-
7 cells do not express caspase-3 and, although the cells die in
response to a variety of apoptotic stimuli such as uv radiation,
paclitaxel, tamoxifen and etoposide, studies have reported
little detectable processing or activation of initiator caspase-9
during the process.10,11 the observation that cpt-treated
mcf-7 cells exhibit a delayed death response with few
phenotypic features of apoptosis prompted further investiga-
tion into the underlying mechanisms.
results
mcf-7 cells mount a delayed death response to cpt that
is caspase-independent. mcf-7 cells exposed to 2 mm
1department of laboratory medicine and pathology, university of minnesota, minneapolis, mn, usa; 2department of pediatric oncology, johns hopkins university,
baltimore, md, usa; 3department of ophthalmology, university of minnesota, minneapolis, mn, usa and 4cancer center, university of minnesota, minneapolis, mn,
usa
*corresponding author: a kelekar, department of laboratory medicine and pathology, university of minnesota, 312 church street se, 7-122 nils hasselmo hall,
minneapolis, mn 55455, usa. tel: þ 1-612-625-3204; fax: þ 1-612-625-1121; e-mail: ameeta@umn.edu
keywords: apoptosis; breast cancer; autophagy; tumor progression; dna damage
abbreviations: cpt, camptothecin; cyt c, cytochrome c; ann v, annexin v; pi, propidium iodide; tmre, tetramethylrhodamine ethyl ester, perchlorate; dapi, 40-6-
diamidino-2-phenylindole; map-lc3, microtubule-associated protein 1, light chain 3; mdc, monodansyl cadaverine; 3-ma, 3-methyl adenine; lamp-1, lysosomal-
associated membrane protein 1
received 18.1.06; revised 27.6.06; accepted 07.8.06; edited by e baehrecke; published online 22.9.06
dna damage and autophagy in breast cancer cells
mj abedin et al
501
cpt were analyzed for viability at 24 h intervals by ﬂow
cytometry. annexin v (ann v) single positive, propidium
iodide (pi) single positive, and double-positive populations
were collectively counted as ‘dead’, whereas double-negative
cells were considered ‘viable’. cells exhibited a lag period
lasting over 24 h in their response to cpt, with signiﬁcant
decrease in viability in 48 h, represented by a strong single-
positive pi component indicative of necrosis. the release
of mitochondrial cyt c within 24 h of exposure to cpt
(figure 1b), however, suggested that dying cells were
engaging the intrinsic pathway. confocal microscopy of
mitotracker red-labeled cells (figure 1c) show a distinct
change in mitochondrial morphology over 48 h of cpt
exposure from an evenly distributed punctate pattern to one
of aggregates in the cytosol. other hallmarks of apoptosis,
however, such as blebbing, discrete dna fragmentation (not
shown) or caspase activation, were absent. the broad-
spectrum caspase inhibitor, z-vad-fmk, did not inhibit cpt-
induced death and, in fact, modestly accelerated the death
response (figure 1d). the western blot
in figure 1e
suggests that activation of initiator caspases 8 and 9 and
effector caspases 6 and 7 as determined by cleavage of their
zymogen forms (mcf-7 cells do not express caspase-3), was
low to undetectable 48 h following cpt exposure.
figure 1 cell death induced by cpt in the mcf-7 breast cancer cell line is largely caspase-independent. (a) cells were incubated with 2 mm cpt for the indicated time.
cell death was quantiﬁed using ﬂow cytometry as described in materials and methods. results (mean7s.e.) represent the average of three or more experiments. (b)
mitochondrial (top panel) and cytosolic (lower panel) fractions from control and 24 h cpt-treated mcf-7 cells were immunoblotted with cyt c, cox iv and actin antibodies. (c)
confocal images of control mcf-7 cells (a) and cells treated with cpt for 24 h (b) and 48 h (c) showing mitochondria labeled with the ﬂuorescent dye mitotracker red observed
at 60 magniﬁcation using a bio-rad mrc 1024 single photon confocal microscope. (d) cells were incubated with 2 mm cpt in the presence or absence of 25 mm z-vad-
fmk for the indicated time. viability was determined by ﬂow cytometric analysis of ann v and pi uptake. results (mean7s.e.) represent the average of three experiments. (e)
lysates from control and 48 h cpt-treated mcf-7 cells were resolved by sds-page and sequentially immunoblotted with antibodies against caspase-9, -8, -7, and -6,
followed by gapdh to control for loading
cell death and differentiation
502
dna damage and autophagy in breast cancer cells
mj abedin et al
a small subset of bh3-only transcripts is upregulated in
mcf-7 cells following treatment with cpt. the release of
mitochondrial cyt c pointed to an intrinsic death pathway.
therefore, the inability of these cells to activate a robust
caspase cascade was intriguing. to further investigate this
dna damage response, we examined early signaling events.
first, we determined whether bh3-only proteins of the bcl-2
family were transcriptionally activated by carrying out rnase
protection assays (rpas) on total rna isolated from cells
exposed to 2 mm cpt using multiprobe bh3-only rpa
templates.12 figure 2a shows representative rpas, and
figure 2b shows quantitative analyses of
the observed
changes in mrna expression of some of the proapoptotic
bh3-only members. cpt treatment resulted in the induction
of at least ﬁve different bh3-only transcripts. transcripts
encoding puma, the three isoforms of bim (bimel, biml and
bims), bik, bid and noxa (not shown) were upregulated;
anti-apoptotic mcl-1l also increased gradually whereas mcl-
1s levels remained constant. among the transcripts included
in probe set 2, only map-1 rna showed any increase
whereas expression of bnip3, bmf, rad9, bcl-xl bcl-xs, bad
and bcl-gl remained constant.
bcl-2 family protein and p53 expression during the cpt
response. western blots of whole cell
lysates from cpt-
treated cells (figure 3a) conﬁrmed the early induction of
bh3-only proteins, puma and noxa. bim el was processed
to a shorter form due most
likely to dephosphorylation.
phosphorylation of bimel by erk1/2 is known to
dramatically reduce its ability to bind bax and prime it for
proteasomal degradation.13 thus bimel appears to be
regulated both transcriptionally and posttranslationally in
response to dna damage. bims was undetectable and biml
expression was unchanged (not shown). the expression of
the other bh3-only proteins showing rna induction, bid, bik
and map-1, as well as that of the multi-domain antiapoptotic
and proapoptotic bcl-2 family members, bcl-2, bcl-xl, bak
and bax, remained constant over this time period (figure 3a,
and not shown). it should be noted that the bax antibody
used in this experiment recognizes both the inactive and
figure 2 modulation of proapoptotic bh3-only member transcripts by cpt in mcf-7 cells. cells were incubated with cpt for 6, 9, 12, 24, and 48 h before extraction and
quantiﬁcation of total rna and protein. (a) representative autoradiograph of an rpa gel from one of three experiments performed as described (10 mg total rna, per time
point) in materials and methods. rpas using multiprobe sets 1 and 2 are shown in the left and right panels, respectively. labeled multiprobes are in the left-most lane of each
panel, and the identities of the probes and protected double-stranded rnas are marked on the right of each autoradiograph. the protected fragments are shorter than the
probes because of the nature of the assay system. an internal loading control template, gapdh, was included with each template set. (b) quantiﬁcation of rna levels from
three rpa analyses. the optical density of each band was normalized relative to the optical density of gapdh by the following equation: optical density of the mrna band/
optical density of the gapdh band 100 and relative rna levels expressed as arbitrary units. bars represent the mean (7s.e.) normalized optical densities of mrna bands
(p-value relative to control)
cell death and differentiation
dna damage and autophagy in breast cancer cells
mj abedin et al
503
figure 3 expression of p53 and selected bcl-2 family members in cpt-treated mcf-7 cell lysates and mitochondria. (a) western blots of whole-cell lysates (50 mg total
protein) harvested at indicated times following cpt exposure. lysates were resolved on 14% (or 18%) tris-glycine sds-polyacrylamide gels and transferred to nitrocellulose.
membranes were sequentially stripped and reprobed (except in the case of the noxa immunoblot, when an 18% gel was used to resolve the lysate). actin protein expression
(bottom panel) was used as loading control. the actin control is not shown for the noxa western. (b) western blots of mitochondrial fractions from untreated and 24 h cpt-
treated mcf-7 cells. mitochondrially enriched fractions (50 mg total protein) were resolved by sds-page and transferred to nitrocellulose. membranes were sequentially
stripped and reprobed. cyt c release (top panel) is an indicator of apoptosis and cox iv expression (second panel) serves both as control for the fractionation procedure as
well for loading. (c) mitochondrially enriched fractions from 24 h cpt-treated and control mcf-7 cells, were lysed in chaps lysis buffer. immunoprecipitation of active bax
lysate (400 mg) was carried out with anti-bax 6a7 monoclonal antibody (bd pharmingen), immunoprecipitates were resolved by sds-page and
from mitochondrial
immunoblotted with anti-bax (n-20) polyclonal antibody followed, after stripping, by anti-p53 fl-393 antibody
active forms of the protein. enriched mitochondrial fractions
conﬁrmed cyt c release in 24 h cpt-treated mcf-7 cells and
showed the accumulation of puma, noxa and processed
bimel at
the mitochondria (figure 3b). a proapoptotic
function for mitochondrially localized p53, independent of
its transcriptional activator function, has been described.14,15
at the mitochondria, p53 can interact with bcl-xl as well as
bax; the disruption of a p53/bcl-xl interaction by bh3-only
protein, puma, allows p53 to interact with bax and promote
cyt c release. figure 3c shows that bax is immuno-
precipitable only from 24 h cpt-treated mitochondrial
fractions with the 6a7 monoclonal antibody that recognizes
the active form of the protein (top panel), and that active
bax interacts with the induced p53 protein in this fraction
(bottom panel).
the induction of p53,
transcriptional and translational
modulation of selected bh3-only proteins, translocation of
p53 to mitochondrial sites, and loss of mitochondrial cyt c were
indicative of a prototypical
intrinsic response predicted to
activate a robust apoptotic caspase cascade initiated by the
capase-9 protein. however, data showed instead that cells
were dying by a mechanism that was largely caspase
independent for at least 48 h (figure 1). other groups have
noted the lack of an active caspase-9 component in the death
response of mcf-7 cells exposed to chemotherapeutic drugs,
such as paclitaxel and tamoxifen, and to uv and gamma
radiation.10,11
despite
evidence
substantial
cpt induces autophagy in mcf-7 cells. the lack of clear
apoptotic markers
for
mitochondrial perturbations in mcf-7 cells following cpt
exposure was puzzling. transmission electron microscopy
indicated little overt blebbing but revealed the presence of
large vacuoles in a number of
the cpt-treated cells,
suggesting the activation of an autophagic response
(figure 4a). interesting functional links have been revealed
between apoptosis and autophagy. for instance, low levels
vacuolar
ﬂuorescent
permeabilization
of mitochondrial membrane
and
depolarization can trigger sequestration and autophagy of
damaged mitochondria.16,17 recent studies have shown that
tamoxifen and nutrient starvation activate autophagy in mcf-
7 cells.11,18,19 to conﬁrm the presence of autophagosomes,
control and cpt-exposed mcf-7 cells were double-labeled
with the mitochondria-selective mitotracker green (mtg) dye
and with monodansyl cadaverine (mdc), an auto-ﬂuorescent
and selective marker for autophagic vacuoles.19,20 figure 4b
shows aggregated mitochondria labeled with mtg (on left)
and
staining with mdc
accumulation (center) in cpt-treated cells. the overlay on
the right shows colocalization of a large number of
the
mitochondria with the autophagic vacuoles. similarly, gfp-
tagged lc321 expressing mcf-7 cells shows that the diffuse
gfp ﬂuorescence in control mcf-7-gfp-lc3 cells changes
to bright green vacuolar ﬂuorescence often overlapping
with using mitotracker red staining following exposure to
cpt (figure 4c). the microtubule-associated protein 1, light
chain 3 (map-lc3) protein is cytoplasmically localized, but
is post-translationally cleaved and lipidated and localized
autophagy.21
exclusively
quantitative analyses of colocalization by either approach
showed that 45–55% of aggregated mitochondria were
associated with autophagosomes within 24 h. figure 4d
shows representative ﬁelds of 40-6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
(dapi)-stained gfp-lc3-expressing
in
punctate gfp ﬂuorescence
quantifying cpt-induced
(figure 4e).
autophagosomes
cells
used
red
to
during
autophagy in mammalian cells as well as yeast is sensitive
to inhibition of pi3 kinase activity. autophagosome precursors
are not generated in cells treated with pi3-kinase inhibitors,
such as 3-methyl adenine (3-ma) and wortmannin.22 to
further determine whether autophagy was contributing to the
cpt response, cells were treated with inhibitors of autophagy
in the presence of the drug. mcf-7 cells were incubated with
either wortmannin, baﬁlomycin a1 or 3-ma, 4–6 h before
cell death and differentiation
504
dna damage and autophagy in breast cancer cells
mj abedin et al
figure 4 cpt induces autophagy in mcf-7 cells. (a) mcf-7 cells treated with either dmso or cpt (2 mm) for 30 h were harvested, ﬁxed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde and
postﬁxed in 1% osmium tetroxide. ultramicrotome sections were poststained and imaged on a jeol 1200 ex transmission electron microscope at 80 kv. (b) control (not
shown) and 24 h cpt-treated mcf-7 cells were double labeled with 20 nm mtg (left) and 100 mm mdc (center) and observed under a bio-rad mrc 1024 single photon
confocal microscope at 100 magniﬁcation. overlay is shown on right. (c) gfp-lc3-expressing mcf-7 cells were treated with dmso or 2 mm cpt for 24 h, labeled with
mitotracker red and observed using a confocal microscope. top panels – dmso-treated mcf-7-gfp-lc3 cells, bottom panels – 24 h cpt-treated mcf-7-gfp-lc3 cells (a
and d, mitotracker red; b and e, gfp; c and f, merged). (d and e) mcf-7 cells expressing gfp-lc3 were treated with dmso or cpt for 24 h, ﬁxed and mounted with dapi-
containing mounting medium and observed under a zeiss ﬂuorescence microscope (d). the increase in punctate green ﬂuorescence, indicative of autophagy, was quantiﬁed
using the ‘analyze particles’ command in the image j software (e)
harvesting to minimize additional effects on signaling path-
ways unrelated to the cpt response. all three compounds
caused a 5–10% (statistically signiﬁcant) increase in the dying
population of cpt-treated cells (figure 5a). we also
determined the effect of autophagy inhibition on uptake of
the mitochondrial membrane potential (dpsim)-sensitive dye
and lipophilic cation, tetramethylrhodamine ethyl ester, per-
chlorate (tmre), following cpt treatment in the presence
and absence of autophagy inhibitors. a few hours of
incubation with 3-ma resulted in a 10% increase in the
proportion of depolarized mitochondria in cpt-treated cells
(figure 5b). similar observations were made with wortmannin
and baﬁlomycin a1 (not shown). caspase-9 activity, as
determined using a colorimetric substrate cleavage assay,
also increased in 48 h cpt-treated cells that were exposed to
3-ma, although this difference was less discernible at the 24 h
time point (figure 5c).
these data suggested that autophagy inhibition was
unmasking or accelerating the apoptotic component of the
cpt response in the mcf-7 cells. to further validate our
observations, we exposed cells knocked down for beclin 1
expression, to dna-damaging drugs.
loss of expression of autophagy proteins unmasks a
caspase-dependent apoptotic pathway in dna-damaged
mcf-7 cells. beclin 1, the mammalian ortholog of apg6, is a
component of the class iii pi3-kinase complex involved in
cell death and differentiation
proteins
upon
of
long-lived
autophagic vesicle formation. beclin 1 overexpression
increases the number of autophagic vacuoles and the
degradation
amino-acid
deprivation in mcf-7 cells.23 this protein is also known to
interact with the antiapoptotic protein, bcl-2.24,25 it may be
noted here that although some groups have referred to mcf-
7 as beclin 1-negative cells, we have consistently detected
the expression of endogenous beclin 1 in mcf-7 western
blots using the sensitive super signal west femto kit (pierce
biotech). we did not observe increased beclin 1 expression
in cpt-exposed cells, although levels of the protein were
reduced in 24 h treated mitochondria suggesting degradation
or intracellular translocation (not shown). to determine the
effect of beclin 1 loss on the dna damage response, its
expression in mcf-7 cells was downregulated using small
hairpin (sh) rna constructs. figure 6a shows a western blot
isolates with 480% loss in beclin 1
with three clonal
expression. beclin 1low cells expressing gfp-lc3 showed
highly reduced punctate green ﬂuorescence compared to
controls (supplementary figure 1). next, we determined
the response of the beclin 1low cell lines to dna damage.
figure 6b shows representative dot plots of pi and ann v
uptake by mcf-7 clone 4 (on the right) and parental mcf-7
cells (on the left) treated with dimethylsulfoxide (dmso),
cpt or etoposide, a dna-damaging drug that acts by
inhibiting topoisomerase ii.26 beclin 1 downregulation
substantially increased the number of apoptotic (ann v
dna damage and autophagy in breast cancer cells
mj abedin et al
505
figure 5 inhibitors of autophagy accelerate cpt-induced apoptotic cell death in mcf-7 cells. (a) cells from exponentially growing and cpt-treated cultures were collected
at the times indicated. inhibitors of autophagy, wortmannin (10 mm), baﬁlomycin a1 (200 nm) and 3-ma (10 mm) were added to the culture medium 5 h before harvesting. cell
survival was measured by ﬂow cytometric analysis of cells stained with ﬂuorescein-labeled ann v and pi. statistical comparisons of mean values were carried out using
student’s t-test; p-values p0.05 were considered to be statistically signiﬁcant. (b) mitochondrial depolarization following 24 h cpt exposure in the presence or absence of
10 mm 3-ma. mcf-7 cells were incubated with the dpsim-sensitive mitochondrial dye, tmre (40 nm) for 15 min before harvesting. proﬁle of unstained, untreated control
(black outline) is included with each histogram. (c) cells were treated with 2 mm cpt in the presence or absence of 3-ma (10 mm) and harvested at the time indicated.
caspase-9 activity levels in cell lysates were determined in triplicate in a colorimetric cleavage assay using lehd-pna as substrate
positive) cells in response to both cpt and etoposide (similar
results were obtained with other beclin 1low clones). the
apoptotic nature of the response further conﬁrmed by its
sensitivity to caspase inhibition (figure 6c) and a 3–4-fold
the beclin 1low cells to cleave
increase in the ability of
the caspase-9 substrate, lehd-pna, within 24 h of cpt
exposure (figure 6d). to conﬁrm that the observed effect
of beclin 1 was not
independent of autophagy atg7, a
protein involved in the ubiquitination of map-lc3,27,28 was
also downregulated in mcf-7 cells, and shown to activate
an apoptotic component following cpt exposure (figure 7a
and b).
the results suggest
autophagy delays apoptosis in noninvasive breast
cancers. taken together,
that cpt
activated an intrinsic pathway and early mitochondrial
damage, while simultaneously triggering an autophagic
response in the cells that prolonged their survival. we were
interested in determining whether autophagy inhibition
regulated the dna damage response in diverse breast
epithelial cells and cancer
lines. a small selection of
commercially available immortalized and tumorigenic breast
the t47d cell
cells
epithelial
cell
epithelial cell lines were treated with cpt, in the presence
and absence of autophagy inhibitors. the estrogen receptor
positive (erpos), mcf-7 breast cancer cells, although
derived from a pleural effusion, are noninvasive cells in
mouse models.29 we also determined the response to cpt
exposure and autophagy inhibition of
line
which, like mcf-7, is erpos, tumorigenic, but noninvasive,
primary
human mammary
(hmecs),
line mcf-10a (not
immortalized nontumorigenic
shown), and three metastatic, erneg cell
lines, bt-549,
mda-mb-231 and mda-mb-435 (representative data are
shown in figure 8). cpt triggered rapid cell death in hmecs
and microscopic examination of the dying hmecs revealed
blebbing and apoptotic body formation characteristic of
apoptotic cells (not shown). the rate of cell death was
further enhanced in the presence of autophagy inhibitors,
3-ma (figure 8) and baﬁlomycin a1 (not shown), indicating
that cpt treatment activated both an apoptotic response as
well as an adaptive, autophagic response in normal breast
epithelial cells. the t47d cells were more resistant to cpt
but,
like mcf-7 cells, died an accelerated death when
autophagy was inhibited during cpt exposure. the
cell death and differentiation
506
dna damage and autophagy in breast cancer cells
mj abedin et al
figure 6 downregulation of autophagy protein beclin 1 activates apoptotic pathways in mcf-7 cells following dna damage. (a) mcf-7 cells were transfected with a beclin
1 shrna plasmid using the pgspu6 expression vector and a lipofectamine transfection protocol. the ﬁgure shows western blots of mcf-7 control cells and three clonal
isolates from the transfected populations, probed with antibodies against beclin 1 (top panel), stripped and reprobed for actin expression (bottom panel). (b) dot plots of ann v
(fl1 channel) and pi (fl2 channel) uptake of control mcf-7 and beclin 1low clone 4 cells exposed to dmso (top) or dna-damaging agents, cpt (center) and etoposide
(bottom) for 24 h. (c) cells were incubated with 2 mm cpt in the presence or absence of 25 mm z-vad-fmk for 24 h. viability was determined by ﬂow cytometric analysis of ann
v and pi uptake. results (mean7s.e.) represent the average of three data points. (d) graph showing caspase-9 activity in mcf-7 transfectants, beclin 1scr and beclin 1low
(clone 4) following exposure to cpt, as determined by colorimetric substrate (lehd-pna) cleavage assays. results expressed as arbitrary units per microgram protein
(mean7s.e.) represent the average of three data points
lines bt-549, mda-mb-231
metastatic breast cancer cell
to
and mda-mb-435, on the other hand, were resistant
concentrations of cpt that killed the hmec, mcf-7 and
t47d lines, either in the presence or absence of autophagy
inhibitors. the inability of invasive breast cancer cell lines to
activate apoptosis in response to both dna damage and
autophagy inhibition suggests that the autophagic survival
response may either be independent of apoptosis or
irrelevant
in cells that have acquired resistance to
genotoxic stress stimuli. the delayed apoptosis in the
noninvasive tumor cells could stem from a defective
apoptotic pathway, contributed to by aberrant expression of
an intermediate such as caspase-3,
further aided by a
‘defective’ autophagic pathway, resulting, for instance, from
constitutive expression of low levels of the beclin 1 protein. in
fact, constitutive beclin 1 expression may be an early factor,
though not the only factor, contributing to the maintenance
of the malignant phenotype and helping to promote tumor
progression (supplementary figure 2). cells treated with
either cpt or
and
the tor inhibitor
rapamycin,
for
immunostained for lysosomal-associated membrane protein
1 (lamp-1), a marker
lysosomes associated with
intermediate and late autophagy,30 suggested that
the
autophagic response was intact in all three invasive cell
lines (figure 8b and c). these observations suggest that
autophagy as an adaptive early response to genotoxic stress
enhances survival by retarding the rate of apoptosis in
primary or immortalized breast cells and noninvasive breast
cancer cells.
discussion
we have investigated the mechanisms underlying the delayed
death response of the mcf-7 breast cancer line to the drug,
cpt. consistent with published studies, induction of a number
of bh3-only transcripts and proteins, including puma and
noxa, was preceded by an increase in the expression of p53,
and the induced bh3 proteins localized to mitochondria within
24 h of drug exposure. the bimel isoform was converted to a
shorter protein indicative of dephosphorylation, a modiﬁcation
cell death and differentiation
dna damage and autophagy in breast cancer cells
mj abedin et al
507
activity and possible defects in apoptosome formation/
caspase-9 activation, although studies have shown that
restoration of caspase-3 expression only partially restores
apoptosis in these cells.11 furthermore, breast cancers
expressing normal caspase-3, such as t47d, also mount an
autophagic response to a variety of therapeutics, including
dna-damaging agents (figure 8 and mooney et al.33).
we provide further evidence that
inhibiting autophagy
stimulates apoptotic pathways in dna-damaged mcf-7 cells
by eliminating the expression of beclin 1 and atg7 proteins.
atg7 is an e1-like enzyme involved in the ubiquitination of
map-lc3 early in the pathway,21 whereas beclin 1 controls
autophagosome formation by entering into a complex with
class iii pi3 kinase.23,34,35 pattingre et al.36 have demon-
strated that the release of beclin 1 from a complex with er
localized bcl-2 underlies the nutrient starvation response in
mcf-7 cells. our studies show that beclin 1 expression is also
necessary for suppression of the apoptotic response to dna
damage in mcf-7 cells. beclin 1 is monoallelically deleted
in 40–75% of sporadic human breast cancers, and protein
expression is consistently reduced in breast tumors that have
lost one allele.34 our studies show that further downregulation
or total loss of beclin 1 expression essentially abrogates the
autophagic ‘survival’ response to dna damage, allowing cells
to die by apoptosis. similarly, knockdown of atg7 increased
apoptosis in response to cpt, although the response was
weaker than that observed in beclin 1low cells.
a number of treatments used against breast and ovarian
cancers, including tamoxifen, rapamycin and radiation, have
been shown to activate autophagy at low doses.18,37,38 this
study is the ﬁrst demonstration that dna-damaging chemo-
therapeutic drugs, cpt and etoposide, activate an autophagic
stress response in the mcf-7 breast cancer cells. this
work also shows that knock down of proteins, such as beclin
1, critical for autophagosome formation, can expose a latent
apoptotic pathway in these cells. studies showing that stable
overexpression of beclin 1 reduces the malignant phenotype
and ability for anchorage-independent growth in mcf-7
cells,23 have led to the suggestion that autophagy is a
tumor-suppressing event and beclin 1, a tumor suppressor.
although a fully activated autophagic response may be tumor
suppressing, we would argue that autophagy resulting from
low, but constitutive, beclin 1 protein expression serves a
survival
function by blocking the onset of an apoptotic
cascade during periods of stress. implications of monoallelic
deletion of the beclin 1 gene notwithstanding, it is highly
signiﬁcant that the protein shows constitutive steady-state
expression in all the breast cancer cell lines examined, but not
in primary hmecs (supplementary figure 2) or in immorta-
lized mcf-10a cells (not shown). basal expression of beclin 1
may allow for a faster autophagic response to stress stimuli,
further contributing to the suppression of apoptosis. this may
be particularly evident
if cells harbor defective apoptotic
machinery that results in a muted apoptotic response, as in
the case of the mcf-7 cells.
a number of provocative questions are raised by this study.
for instance, is there a common critical initiating event in the
dna damage response for both pcd i and ii in breast cancer
cells, or are the two pathways mutually exclusive? what is the
trigger for autophagy initiation in invasive breast cancer cells,
cell death and differentiation
figure 7 downregulation of autophagy protein atg7 activates apoptosis in
cpt-treated mcf-7 cells. (a) mcf-7 cells were transfected with an atg7 shrna or
control (scrambled) rna plasmid using the pgspu6 expression vector and a
lipofectamine transfection protocol. figure shows western blots of mcf-7 control
(untransfected and scrambled rna-transfected) cells and one pooled and two
clonal
isolates from the atg7 shrna-transfected populations, probed with
antibodies against atg7 (top panel), stripped and reprobed for actin expression
(bottom panel). (b) control and atg7 shrna cell lines were incubated with either
dmso or cpt (2 mm) for 24 h. viability was determined by ﬂow cytometric analysis
of ann v and pi uptake
previously shown to reduce its ability to bind bax and prepare
it for proteasomal degradation.31,32 the presence of mito-
chondrially localized active bax associated with p53, and
ﬁnally cyt c release, all predicted an impending apoptotic
caspase cascade. despite early events indicative of a
classical intrinsic apoptotic pathway, however, the proportion
of ann v-positive cells was low, death was largely caspase-
independent and the characteristic dna fragmentation
observed in apoptotic cells was absent (not shown). trans-
mission electron microscopy and confocal microscopy re-
vealed the presence of large vacuoles often colocalizing with
mitochondria, suggesting the activation of autophagic me-
chanisms. furthermore, exposure to autophagy inhibitors
such as baﬁlomycin a1 and 3-ma caused a small, but
statistically signiﬁcant, enhancement of both apoptosis and
caspase-9 activity in the cpt-treated cell population.
although sustained autophagy contributes to cell death, this
pathway may be an early attempt to establish homeostasis.
mitochondrial membrane permeabilization and cyt c release
below the threshold required for apoptosis can promote
sequestration and turnover of the damaged mitochondria in
degradative vacuoles or autophagosomes. such a ‘check-
point’ may serve as an effective survival strategy for the cells,
providing an immediate source of metabolic energy in the form
of atp from the damaged mitochondria. the overt pcd ii
response in mcf-7 cells may be due to lack of caspase-3
508
dna damage and autophagy in breast cancer cells
mj abedin et al
figure 8 cpt-treated primary and noninvasive, but not metastatic, breast cell lines show enhanced apoptosis in response to autophagy inhibition. (a) the breast cell lines
hmec, mcf-7, t47d, bt-549, mda-mb-231 and mda-mb-435, treated with dmso or cpt for 24 h, were incubated in the presence or absence of 3-ma for 5 h before
harvesting. cell viability was determined by facs analysis as described earlier. results (mean7s.e.) represent the average of at least three data points. (b) breast cancer
cells mount autophagic responses to both cpt and rapamycin. cells were grown to 30–50% conﬂuence on chamber slides and treated with dmso or 2 mm cpt for 24 h, or
20 nm rapamycin for 36 h, ﬁxed, permeabilized and immunolabeled with polyclonal anti-lamp-1 primary antibody, followed by alexa 488-tagged secondary antibody. fixed
and labeled cells were mounted in vectastain containing dapi and visualized using a bio-rad mrc 1024 multi-photon confocal microscope. data were quantiﬁed (c) using
the ‘analyze particles’ command in image j software. 231 – mda-mb-231, 435 – mda-mb-435
particularly those with high basal levels of autophagy, such as
the mda-mb-231 cells (figure 8b and c)? our observations
indicate that autophagy inhibition does not activate latent
apoptotic pathways in the three invasive cell lines examined,
and it is tempting to suggest that (dna damaging) stimuli,
which activate autophagy as an adaptive response in breast
cancers cells, eventually select
for cells with a survival
advantage thus promoting tumor progression. the selection
process could result from the accumulation of compensatory
dna mutations by the exposed cell as it survives by ‘self-
eating’
in the face of damaged or poorly repaired dna.
studies aimed at determining whether controlled exposure of
breast epithelial and noninvasive breast cancer cells to dna
damage promotes tumor progression and drug-resistance via
activation or maintenance of an increasingly overt autophagic
phase are currently underway.
materials and methods
cell lines, chemicals and antibodies. mcf-7 breast cancer cells were
grown in minimal essential medium (mem) with 10% fetal calf serum (fcs), 2 mm
l-glutamine, non-essential amino acids, 1 mm sodium pyruvate, 100 units/ml
penicillin and 100 mg/ml streptomycin, bt549 cells were grown in rpmi 1640 with
10% fcs, 2 mm l-glutamine, 0.15 mg/ml insulin, 100 units/ml penicillin and 100 mg/
ml streptomycin. t47d cells were cultured in mem with 5% fcs, non-essential
amino acids, 2 mm l-glutamine, 0.15 mg/ml human insulin, 100 units/ml penicillin
and 100 mg/ml streptomycin. mda-mb-231 and ma-mb-435 lines were maintained
in dmem with 10% fcs, 11.25 nm human insulin, 100 units/ml penicillin and
100 mg/ml streptomycin. primary hmecs were cultured in mammary epithelial basal
medium(clonetics), supplemented with growth factors, cytokines and supplements
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. the cells were maintained in a
humidiﬁed atmosphere of 5% co2 at 371c.
baﬁlomycin a1, 3-methyl adenine and rapamycin were purchased from sigma
(st. louis, mo, usa). mitotracker red, mitotracker green, tmre and mdc were
obtained from molecular probes, inc. (eugene, or, usa). cpt was from biovision
inc. (palo alto, ca, usa) and wortmannin was from emd biosciences (la jolla, ca,
usa). antibodies were obtained or purchased from the following sources/suppliers:
mouse monoclonal anti-actin antibody from oncogene (san diego, ca, usa); rabbit
polyclonal anti-human bak, nt from upstate biotechnology (lake placid, ny, usa);
rabbit polyclonal anti-bax (n-20), rabbit polyclonal p53 (pab 1801) and mouse
monoclonal anti-p53 (do-1) antibodies from santa cruz biotechnology (santa
cruz, ca, usa); mouse monoclonal anti-bax, bcl-2 and rabbit polyclonal anti-beclin
1 from bd pharmingen (san diego, ca, usa); rabbit polyclonal anti-human bid
from cell signaling (beverly, ma, usa); rabbit polyclonal anti-human bim el/l from
stressgen (british columbia, canada); cytochrome oxidase subunit iv (cox iv)
mouse monoclonal antibody from molecular probes (eugene, or, usa); rabbit
polyclonal anti-human puma from abcam (cambridge, ma, usa); mouse
monoclonal anti human-noxa from imgenex (san diego, ca, usa); rabbit
polyclonal atg7 antibody from prosci inc. (poway, ca, usa) and anti-lamp-1
antibody from afﬁnity bioreagents (golden, co, usa). the monoclonal anti-cyt c
antibody was a generous gift from ron jemmerson (university of minnesota) and
rabbit polyclonal anti-bcl-xl (13.6) has been described previously.39 the gfp-lc3
plasmid was a kind gift from drs. t yoshimori (national institute of genetics,
shizuoka-ken, japan) and n mizushima (the tokyo metropolitan institute of
medical science, japan).
induction of apoptosis and apoptosis assays. mcf-7 cells were
allowed to reach p80% conﬂuency in fresh medium before treatment.
cell death and differentiation
exponentially growing cells were exposed to 2 mm cpt for speciﬁc periods of time.
for the apoptosis assays, which were carried out in triplicate, 0.5–1 106 cells from
exponentially growing and cpt-treated cultures were collected at
the times
indicated. inhibitors of autophagy, such as wortmannin (10 mm), baﬁlomycin a1
(200 nm) and 3-methyladenine (10 mm) were added to the culture medium 4–6 h
before harvesting. adherent mcf-7 cells were detached from culture plates with
accutase (innovative cell technologies, san diego, ca, usa) or trypsin-ethylene
diaminetetra acetic acid (edta) and pelleted with predetached ﬂoaters. all cell
cultures were washed in cold phosphate-buffered saline (pbs) and resuspended in
ann v binding buffer. cell survival was measured by ﬂow cytometric analysis of cells
stained with ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate-labeled ann v and pi and analyzed using
cellquest pro software (bd biosciences, san jose, ca, usa). ann v single
positive, pi single positive and double-positive populations were collectively counted
as ‘dead’, whereas double-negative cells were considered viable. to label
mitochondria, mcf-7 cells were incubated with 40 nm tmre or 75 nm mitotracker
red at 371c and 5% co2 in culture medium for 15 min before harvesting for ﬂow
cytometry, or ﬁxing in 3.7% paraformaldehyde for confocal microscopy,
respectively.
in vitro transcription and multiprobe ribonuclease protection
assays. total rna was extracted from untreated cells or cells treated with cpt
at the indicated periods of time using the rneasy midi kit (qiagen, valencia, ca,
usa). two bh3-only multiple rpa template sets generated in our laboratory were
used in the protection assays.12 probe set 1 included puma, bim, bnip3, bak, bik,
mcl-1, bid and housekeeping gene gapdh as a loading control, and probe set 2
included bax, bmf, map-1, rad9, bcl-x, bad, bcl-g, hrk and gapdh. multiple rpa
was performed with the hybspeedt rpa kit according to the protocol previously
outlined12 using [32p]-utp labeled antisense rna probes and 10 mg total cell rna.
protected fragments in autoradiographs of dried exposed gels were quantiﬁed by
densitometry using biorad gs-363 molecular imager and molecular analyst
software. optical density values of bh3-only rna bands were normalized relative to
gapdh bands and rna levels were expressed as arbitrary units (mean and
standard deviations, n¼ 3). statistical comparisons of mean values were carried
out using student’s t-test; p-values p0.05 were considered to be statistically
signiﬁcant.
lysates
of whole-cell
preparation
and mitochondrial
fractions. after treatment with 2 mm cpt for 0, 3, 6, 9, 12 and 24 h, mcf-7
cells were pelleted by centrifugation and washed once with pbs. cells were then
resuspended in ripa buffer (50 mm tris-hcl, ph 7.5, 150 mm nacl, 1% v/v nonidet
p-40, 0.5% v/v sodium deoxycholate and 0.1% sds) supplemented with protease
inhibitor cocktail (calbiochem) and lysed on ice for 5 min with intermittent vortexing.
the lysates were centrifuged for 5 min at 10 600 g and supernatant was collected
and used for further experiments. mitochondrial
fractions were enriched from
untreated exponentially growing mcf-7 cells or cells treated with cpt for 24 h. cells
were dislodged with accutase, washed in cold pbs and resuspended in 1.0–1.5 ml
of ice-cold mitochondria isolation buffer (250 mm sucrose, 10 mm tris-hcl, ph 7.4
and 0.1 mm ethylene glycol-bis (b-aminoethyl ether)) containing a protease inhibitor
cocktail. mitochondria were isolated either using the qproteomet mitochondria
isolation kit (qiagen) or by a nitrogen cavitation technique. for the latter, cells were
lysed by nitrogen cavitation (650 psi, 10 min), lysates were collected and centrifuged
at 2500 r.p.m. for 3 min. supernatants were recentrifuged at 10 000 g for 10 min
and pellets, representing the mitochondrial fractions, were resuspended in isolation
buffer. mitochondrial
integrity was conﬁrmed by western blotting using cox iv
antibody.
western blotting and immunoprecipitation. for western blotting,
1 107 cells were lysed in 150 ml of ripa buffer (50 mm tris-hcl, ph 7.5, 150 mm
nacl, 0.5% v/v sodium deoxycholate, 1% v/v nonidet p-40, 0.1% sds)
supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (calbiochem). lysates (50–60 mg
total protein) were electrophoretically separated by 14 or 18% sodium dodecyl
sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (sds-page) and transferred to
nitrocellulose membrane. membrane blocking, washing, primary and secondary
antibody incubations and chemiluminescence reactions were carried out according
to the amersham ecl protocol. antibody dilutions were carried out as per the data
sheet provided by the manufacturer or as suggested by the provider’s laboratory.
blots were stripped for reuse by washing for 30 min to 2 h in tbs-t buffer (ph 2.5–
3.0) at room temperature. for immunoprecipitation, cell extracts were prepared in
lysis buffer (100 mm nacl, 1 mm edta, 20 mm tris (ph 8.0), 0.1% igepal)
dna damage and autophagy in breast cancer cells
mj abedin et al
509
supplemented with a protease inhibitor cocktail. cell lysate (100 mg) was incubated
with 1–5 mg/ml of antibody and immune complexes were captured with protein g
sepharose. proteins were resolved by sds-page, transferred to nitrocellulose
membranes and antigen–antibody complexes were detected using ecl
(amersham biosciences, piscataway, nj, usa). the endogenous beclin 1
protein was detected using the super signal west femto kit (pierce biotech) as per
the manufacturer’s instructions.
active bax was detected by immunoprecipitation in chaps lysis buffer, with an
anti-bax monoclonal antibody, 6a7 (bd pharmingen), that recognizes bax only in
the active conformation.40 mitochondrially enriched fractions were prepared from
24 h cpt-treated and control mcf-7 cells lysed in chaps lysis buffer (2% chaps,
150 mm nacl, 1 mm n-2-hydroxyl piperazine-n0-2-ehane sulfonic acid, ph 7.5)
containing protease inhibitors. for immunoprecipitation, 400 mg of mitochondrial
lysate was incubated with anti-bax 6a7 monoclonal antibody, complexes were
immobilized with protein-g agarose analyzed by sds-page/immunoblot with anti-
bax polyclonal antibody (santa cruz biotech).
caspase activity assays. cells were collected following treatment with 2 mm
cpt for the time indicated. cells were centrifuged to pellet and washed once in 1
pbs. the cell pellet was then ﬂash frozen in a dry ice/ethanol bath. after collection
of all time points, cell pellets were lysed on ice for 10 min with intermittent vortexing
in 160 ml
lysis buffer (r&d systems, minneapolis, mn, usa). lysates were
centrifuged for 1 min at 10 600 g and a small volume of supernatant was set aside
for total protein estimation. the remainder was tested for caspase activity in
triplicate using a colorimetric assay kit from r&d systems. caspase-9 activity was
determined using lehd-pna as substrate. reactions were allowed to develop for
2 h at 371c and absorbance measured at 405 nm using a microplate reader.
transmission electron microscopy. cells were ﬁxed in 2.5%
glutaraldehyde in 0.1 m sodium cacodylate buffer
room
temperature, then washed 3 times in cacodylate buffer. cells were postﬁxed in 1%
osmium tetroxide in 0.1 m cacodylate buffer for 1 h at room temperature. following
this, 70 nm sections were cut on a ‘reichert ultracut s’ ultramicrotome. the sections
were subsequently post-stained with 4% uranyl acetate for 10 min and reynald’s
lead citrate for 1.5 min. sections were imaged at 80 kv on a jeol 1200 ex
transmission electron microscope.
for 1 h at
(ph 7.4)
confocal and ﬂuorescence microscopy. cells were plated at 50%
conﬂuence on glass chamber slides and treated with 2 mm cpt or dmso for 24 h
and observed using a confocal microscope. cells were incubated with 100 mm mdc
and 20 nm mitotracker green for 15–30 min, washed thoroughly in pbs, ﬁxed for
30 min at 371c in 3.7% paraformaldehyde in pbs, rinsed, dried and mounted under
coverslips using vectashield mounting medium containing dapi
(vector
laboratories, inc.). cells were observed at 60 magniﬁcation using a bio-rad
mrc 1024 single or multi-photon confocal microscope. alternatively, gfp-lc3-
expressing mcf-7 cells treated with cpt for 18 h were labeled with mitotracker red
and observed with the single photon confocal microscope. images were captured
using the bio-rad laser sharp 3.0 and processed with image j or photoshop cs
software. gfp-lc3 translocation was quantiﬁed using the image j software
command ‘analyze particles’, which counts and measures objects in binary or
thresholded images.
beclin 1 and atg7 sh rna constructs,
transfection and
expression. the human beclin 1 shrna sequence (cagtttggcacaa
tcaata) or human atg7 sequence (ggagtcacagctcttcctt) was cloned into
bamh1 and ecor1 sites of the pgsu6 vector (gene therapy systems). control
scrambled and shrna plasmids (1.5 mg) were transfected into mcf-7 cells plated at
50% conﬂuence in six-well plates using lipofectamine (invitrogen, carlsbad, ca,
usa). transfectants were selected in culture medium containing 1.42 mg/ml
geneticin (cellgro, herndon, va, usa) and single-cell clones were isolated using
cloning cylinders (fisher biotech).
acknowledgements. we thank drs. t yoshimori and n mizushima for
sharing the gfp-lc3 plasmid, drs. doug yee, carol lange and vitaly polunovsky
for sharing breast cell lines, dr. robert hafner for help with the transmission electron
microscopy, and jerry sedgewick and john oja for help with the confocal
microscopy. we also thank dr. thomas neufeld for helpful discussions. this work
was supported by research grants from the minnesota medical foundation and from
cell death and differentiation
510
dna damage and autophagy in breast cancer cells
mj abedin et al
the university of minnesota cancer center, a comprehensive cancer center
designated by the national cancer institute and the regis foundation.
1. kaufmann sh, hengartner mo. programmed cell death: alive and well
in the new
millennium. trends cell biol 2001; 11: 526–534.
2. budihardjo i, oliver h, lutter m, luo x, wang x. biochemical pathways of caspase
activation during apoptosis. annu rev cell dev biol 1999; 15: 269–290.
3. gozuacik d, kimchi a. autophagy as a cell death and tumor suppressor mechanism.
oncogene 2004; 23: 2891–2906.
4. wang cw, klionsky dj. the molecular mechanism of autophagy. mol med 2003; 9: 65–76.
5. adams jm, cory s. the bcl-2 protein family: arbiters of cell survival. science 1998; 281:
1322–1326.
6. huang dc, strasser a. bh3-only proteins-essential initiators of apoptotic cell death. cell
2000; 103: 839–842.
7. kelekar a, thompson cb. bcl-2-family proteins: the role of the bh3 domain in apoptosis.
trends cell biol 1998; 8: 324–330.
8. chipuk je, green dr. cytoplasmic p53: bax and forward. cell cycle 2004; 3: 429–431.
9. schuler m, green dr. transcription, apoptosis and p53: catch-22. trends genet 2005; 21:
182–187.
10. ferguson ha, marietta pm, van den berg cl. uv-induced apoptosis is mediated
independent of caspase-9 in mcf-7 cells: a model for cytochrome c resistance. j biol
chem 2003; 278: 45793–45800.
11. kottke tj, blajeski al, meng xw, svingen pa, ruchaud s, mesner jr pw et al. lack of
correlation between caspase activation and caspase activity assays in paclitaxel-treated
mcf-7 breast cancer cells. j biol chem 2002; 277: 804–815.
12. wang d, mcdonnell ma, kelekar a. multi-probe rpa template sets to study rna
modulation and transcriptional control of bh3-only members of the bcl-2 family. cancer
detect prev 2005; 29: 189–200.
13. ley r, balmanno k, hadﬁeld k, weston c, cook sj. activation of the erk1/2 signaling
pathway promotes phosphorylation and proteasome-dependent degradation of the bh3-
only protein, bim. j biol chem 2003; 278: 18811–18816.
14. chipuk je, kuwana t, bouchier-hayes l, droin nm, newmeyer dd, schuler m et al. direct
activation of bax by p53 mediates mitochondrial membrane permeabilization and
apoptosis. science 2004; 303: 1010–1014.
15. mihara m, erster s, zaika a, petrenko o, chittenden t, pancoska p et al. p53 has a direct
apoptogenic role at the mitochondria. mol cell 2003; 11: 577–590.
16. elmore sp, qian t, grissom sf, lemasters jj. the mitochondrial permeability transition
initiates autophagy in rat hepatocytes. faseb j 2001; 15: 2286–2287.
17. elmore sp, nishimura y, qian t, herman b, lemasters jj. discrimination of depolarized
from polarized mitochondria by confocal ﬂuorescence resonance energy transfer. arch
biochem biophys 2004; 422: 145–152.
18. paglin s, hollister t, delohery t, hackett n, mcmahill m, sphicas e et al. a novel response
of cancer cells to radiation involves autophagy and formation of acidic vesicles. cancer res
2001; 61: 439–444.
19. scarlatti f, bauvy c, ventruti a, sala g, cluzeaud f, vandewalle a et al. ceramide-
mediated macroautophagy involves inhibition of protein kinase b and up-regulation of
beclin 1. j biol chem 2004; 279: 18384–18391.
20. biederbick a, kern hf, elsasser hp. monodansylcadaverine (mdc) is a speciﬁc in vivo
marker for autophagic vacuoles. eur j cell biol 1995; 66: 3–14.
21. kabeya y, mizushima n, ueno t, yamamoto a, kirisako t, noda t et al. lc3, a
mammalian homologue of yeast apg8p, is localized in autophagosome membranes after
processing. embo j 2000; 19: 5720–5728.
22. eskelinen el, prescott ar, cooper j, brachmann sm, wang l, tang x et al. inhibition of
autophagy in mitotic animal cells. trafﬁc 2002; 3: 878–893.
23. liang xh, jackson s, seaman m, brown k, kempkes b, hibshoosh h et al. induction of
autophagy and inhibition of tumorigenesis by beclin 1. nature 1999; 402: 672–676.
24. liang xh, kleeman lk, jiang hh, gordon g, goldman je, berry g et al. protection against
fatal sindbis virus encephalitis by beclin, a novel bcl-2-interacting protein. j virol 1998; 72:
8586–8596.
25. liang xh, yu j, brown k, levine b. beclin 1 contains a leucine-rich nuclear export signal
that is required for its autophagy and tumor suppressor function. cancer res 2001; 61:
3443–3449.
26. hande kr. etoposide: four decades of development of a topoisomerase ii inhibitor. eur j
cancer 1998; 34: 1514–1521.
27. komatsu m, waguri s, ueno t, iwata j, murata s, tanida i et al. impairment of star-
vation-induced and constitutive autophagy in atg7-deﬁcient mice. j cell biol 2005; 169:
425–434.
28. tanida i, mizushima n, kiyooka m, ohsumi m, ueno t, ohsumi y et al. apg7p/cvt2p: a
for autophagy. mol biol cell 1999; 10:
novel protein-activating enzyme essential
1367–1379.
29. rizk nn, el-rakhawy mt. tissue culture and scanning electron microscopy of breast
carcinoma ‘cell line mcf-7’ from pleural effusion. acta anat (basel) 1981; 109: 70–74.
30. mizushima n. methods for monitoring autophagy. int j biochem cell biol 2004; 36:
2491–2502.
31. harada h, quearry b, ruiz-vela a, korsmeyer sj. survival factor-induced extracellular
inhibiting its association with bax and
signal-regulated kinase phosphorylates bim,
proapoptotic activity. proc natl acad sci usa 2004; 101: 15313–15317.
32. seward rj, von haller pd, aebersold r, huber bt. phosphorylation of the pro-apoptotic
protein bim in lymphocytes is associated with protection from apoptosis. mol immunol
2003; 39: 983–993.
33. mooney lm, al-sakkaf ka, brown bl, dobson pr. apoptotic mechanisms in t47d and
mcf-7 human breast cancer cells. br j cancer 2002; 87: 909–917.
34. aita vm, liang xh, murty vv, pincus dl, yu w, cayanis e et al. cloning and genomic
organization of beclin 1, a candidate tumor suppressor gene on chromosome 17q21.
genomics 1999; 59: 59–65.
35. kihara a, kabeya y, ohsumi y, yoshimori t. beclin-phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase complex
functions at the trans-golgi network. embo rep 2001; 2: 330–335.
36. pattingre s, tassa a, qu x, garuti r, liang xh, mizushima n et al. bcl-2 antiapoptotic
proteins inhibit beclin 1-dependent autophagy. cell 2005; 122: 927–939.
37. bursch w, ellinger a, kienzl h, torok l, pandey s, sikorska m et al. active cell death
induced by the anti-estrogens tamoxifen and ici 164 384 in human mammary carcinoma
cells (mcf-7) in culture: the role of autophagy. carcinogenesis 1996; 17: 1595–1607.
38. ogier-denis e, codogno p. autophagy: a barrier or an adaptive response to cancer.
biochim biophys acta 2003; 1603: 113–128.
39. boise lh, gonzalez-garcia m, postema ce, ding l, lindsten t, turka la et al. bcl-x, a bcl-
2-related gene that functions as a dominant regulator of apoptotic cell death. cell 1993; 74:
597–608.
40. nechushtan a, smith cl, hsu yt, youle rj. conformation of the bax c-terminus regulates
subcellular location and cell death. embo j 1999; 18: 2330–2341.
supplementary information accompanies the paper on cell death and differentiation website (http://www.nature.com/cdd)
cell death and differentiation