downloaded from 
downloaded from 
downloaded from 
genesdev.cshlp.org
genesdev.cshlp.org
genesdev.cshlp.org
 on march 9, 2015 - published by 
 on march 9, 2015 - published by 
 on march 9, 2015 - published by 
cold spring harbor laboratory press
cold spring harbor laboratory press
cold spring harbor laboratory press
autophagy suppresses tumor progression
by limiting chromosomal instability
robin mathew,1,2 sameera kongara,2,3 brian beaudoin,2,3 cristina m. karp,2 kevin bray,2,3
kurt degenhardt,2,3 guanghua chen,2 shengkan jin,4,5 and eileen white1,2,3,5,6
1university of medicine and dentistry of new jersey, robert wood johnson medical school, piscataway, new jersey 08854,
usa; 2center for advanced biotechnology and medicine, rutgers university piscataway, new jersey 08854, usa;
3department of molecular biology and biochemistry, rutgers university piscataway, new jersey 08854, usa; 4department
of pharmacology, university of medicine and dentistry of new jersey, piscataway, new jersey 08854, usa; 5the cancer
institute of new jersey, new brunswick, new jersey 08903, usa
autophagy is a bulk degradation process that promotes survival under metabolic stress, but it can also be a
means of cell death if executed to completion. monoallelic loss of the essential autophagy gene beclin1 causes
susceptibility to metabolic stress, but also promotes tumorigenesis. this raises the paradox that the loss of a
survival pathway enhances tumor growth, where the exact mechanism is not known. here, we show that
compromised autophagy promoted chromosome instability. failure to sustain metabolism through autophagy
was associated with increased dna damage, gene amplification, and aneuploidy, and this genomic instability
may promote tumorigenesis. thus, autophagy maintains metabolism and survival during metabolic stress that
serves to protect the genome, providing an explanation for how the loss of a survival pathway leads to tumor
progression. identification of this novel role of autophagy may be important for rational chemotherapy and
therapeutic exploitation of autophagy inducers as potential chemopreventive agents.
[keywords: autophagy; beclin1; genomic instability; apoptosis; cancer]
received february 23, 2007; revised version accepted april 12, 2007.
autophagy is an evolutionarily conserved catabolic pro-
cess involving regulated turnover and elimination of pro-
teins and cellular organelles, such as peroxisomes, mito-
chondria, and endoplasmic reticulum, through the lyso-
somal degradation pathway (mizushima 2005). the
process of autophagy is characterized by the formation of
double-membrane cytosolic vesicles, known as autopha-
gosomes, that are essential for the lysosomal targeting of
these organelles. in yeast, a number of autophagy-related
genes (referred to as atg) have been identified that regu-
late the formation of autophagosomes and the autophagy
process (klionsky et al. 2003). several mammalian ho-
mologs of these yeast genes have been identified (levine
and klionsky 2004), among which the essential au-
tophagy genes atg5 and atg7 have been most informative
in demonstrating a role for autophagy in maintaining
metabolism and homeostasis in mammalian develop-
ment.
autophagy, constitutively active at low levels, is ro-
bustly activated under metabolic stress. autophagy
plays an important role in development, as mice defi-
cient in autophagy due to complete deficiency of beclin1
(atg6/vps30), another essential autophagy gene, die early
6corresponding author.
e-mail ewhite@cabm.rutgers.edu; fax (732) 235-5795.
article published online ahead of print. article and publication date are
online at http://www.genesdev.org/cgi/doi/10.1101/gad.1545107.
in embryogenesis (yue et al. 2003). mice lacking atg5 fail
to survive the neonatal starvation period and die perina-
tally, suggesting that autophagy plays an important role
in the maintenance of energy homeostasis (kuma et al.
2004). thus, autophagy functions as an alternative cel-
lular energy source to maintain normal metabolism dur-
ing development and starvation by recycling cytoplasm
and macromolecules (jin and white 2007). furthermore,
targeted deletion of atg5 and atg7 in the central nervous
system results in accumulation of polyubiquitinated
proteins leading to neurodegeneration,
revealing a
housekeeping role for autophagy in the regulation of
long-lived or damaged proteins to prevent neurodegen-
eration (komatsu et al. 2005; hara et al. 2006). the pro-
tective effects of autophagy also include immune-related
functions such as defense against pathogens (kirkegaard
et al. 2004) and t lymphocyte development (pua et al.
2006). thus, autophagy plays a critical role in develop-
ment, survival, and maintenance of homeostasis.
despite its predominant role as a survival pathway,
progressive autophagy can result in cell death if allowed
to proceed to completion under persistent stress and dur-
ing development. in drosophila, autophagic cell death
plays an important role during salivary gland develop-
ment (baehrecke 2003). in mammals, autophagy proteins
beclin1 and atg7 are necessary for the autophagic cell
death induced by the caspase-8 inhibitor zvad-fmk in
l929 cells as well as in human u937 cells (yu et al.
2004). furthermore, apoptosis-resistant bax−/−/bak−/−
genes & development 21:1367–1381 © 2007 by cold spring harbor laboratory press issn 0890-9369/07; www.genesdev.org
1367
downloaded from 
genesdev.cshlp.org
 on march 9, 2015 - published by 
cold spring harbor laboratory press
mathew et al.
mouse embryonic fibroblasts (mefs) undergo autophagic
cell death in response to apoptosis inducers in a beclin1-
and atg5-dependent manner (shimizu et al. 2004). au-
tophagy-like cell death is visualized in alzheimer’s
(cataldo et al. 1994) and parkinson’s (anglade et al. 1997)
and other neurodegenerative diseases (klionsky and emr
2000; gomez-santos et al. 2003). however, evidence in
support of autophagy as a cell death mechanism is lim-
ited mostly to pharmacological induction of autophagy
in cell lines in vitro, and direct evidence in a physiologi-
cal context is frequently lacking. moreover, it is not
clear whether the induction of autophagy under the
above circumstances represents the activation of a spe-
cific pathway for cell death or merely a failed attempt to
promote cell survival under stress.
quite contradictory to its survival-promoting func-
tion, defective autophagy is implicated in tumorigenesis,
as haploinsuffieciency in the essential autophagy gene
beclin1 is commonly observed in sporadic human ovar-
ian, breast, and prostate cancers (aita et al. 1999), and
allelic loss of beclin1 promotes the incidence of sporadic
malignancies in mice (qu et al. 2003; yue et al. 2003). in
addition, oncogenic signals such as that of the class i
phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (pi3k) pathway suppress
autophagy, but if or how this contributes to tumorigen-
esis is not known.
we have shown that defects in apoptosis due to either
bax/bak deficiency or bcl-2 expression reveal autophagy
in response to metabolic stress, which is required for cell
survival (degenhardt et al. 2006). allelic loss of beclin1
impairs both constitutive and stress-induced autophagy,
causing susceptibility to metabolic stress in immortal-
ized baby mouse kidney epithelial (ibmk) cells (degen-
hardt et al. 2006). despite impairment in autophagy-me-
diated survival, the autophagy-defective beclin1+/− ibmk
cells are more tumorigenic than the wild-type cells, and
the tumorigenicity is further accentuated by defects in
apoptosis conferred by bcl-2 expression (degenhardt et
al. 2006). in tumors, autophagy localizes to metaboli-
cally stressed regions, suggesting that tumor cells exploit
autophagy to survive metabolic stress (degenhardt et al.
2006). thus, defects in apoptosis manifest an autophagy-
mediated survival pathway, and concomitant defects in
apoptosis and autophagy render cells susceptible to
metabolic stress while promoting tumorigenesis (nelson
et al. 2004; degenhardt et al. 2006). however, these two
apparently contradictory roles of autophagy lead to the
paradox that the loss of a survival pathway promotes
tumorigenesis.
despite several studies linking autophagy to develop-
ment, protein turnover, maintenance of cell organelles,
and energy homeostasis, there is no satisfactory expla-
nation for the intuitively contradictory roles of au-
tophagy as a survival pathway and a tumor suppressor
mechanism. we report here for the first time that au-
tophagy can function to protect the genome. defects in
autophagy, conferred by either allelic loss of beclin1 or
deficiency in atg5, lead to impaired survival in metabolic
stress and an enhanced dna damage response. further-
more, loss of beclin1 function promotes gene amplifica-
1368
genes & development
tion and chromosomal instability, resulting in aneu-
ploidy, all of which are hallmarks of cancer, suggesting
that autophagy plays a major role in the maintenance of
genomic integrity.
results
allelic loss of beclin1 renders ibmk cells susceptible
to metabolic stress in vitro and impairs autophagy
in vivo
in order to understand the role of impaired autophagy
conferred by allelic loss of beclin1 in tumorigenesis, pri-
mary baby mouse kidney epithelial cells were immortal-
ized from mutant mice, expanding the panel of indepen-
dent cell lines originally isolated (degenhardt et al.
2006). several independent clones of these ibmk cells
were then also engineered to express the anti-apoptotic
protein bcl-2. all expressed the immortalization genes
(e1a and p53dd), and beclin1+/− cells showed reduced
levels of beclin1 compared with beclin1+/+ ibmk cells
(fig. 1a).
previous work demonstrated that allelic loss of
beclin1 in ibmk cells results in a profound defect in
autophagy that confers increased susceptibility to meta-
bolic stress in apoptosis-defective cells (degenhardt et al.
2006), which was reproduced in all the cell lines in the
panel (fig. 1c; see below). this enhanced sensitivity to
metabolic stress was also associated with enhanced tu-
morigenicity, as previously reported (degenhardt et al.
2006). to measure autophagy, beclin1+/+and beclin1+/−
cells stably expressing bcl-2 were engineered to express
the autophagy marker egfp-lc3 and were monitored in
vivo for cytoplasmic-to-membrane translocation, indica-
tive of autophagy. autophagy was robustly activated in
beclin1+/+ ibmk cells overexpressing bcl-2, which was
profoundly diminished due to allelic loss of beclin1 (de-
genhardt et al. 2006). wild-type ibmk cells expressing
bcl-2 demonstrated massive induction of autophagy in
the tumor tissue, indicated by punctate cytoplasmic lc3
translocation (fig. 1b, red arrows). in stark contrast, tu-
mors from the autophagy-defective beclin1+/− ibmk
cells expressing bcl-2 displayed predominantly diffuse
localization, indicative of an autophagy defect (fig. 1b).
as tumor allografts suffer from a lack of oxygen and nu-
trition at early stages of implantation before adequate
vascularization is established (nelson et al. 2004), this
observation suggests that tumor cells exploit the au-
tophagy pathway to survive intermittent metabolic
stress in vivo. this is consistent with our earlier obser-
vation that defects in apoptosis reveal the autophagy sur-
vival pathway, and autophagy localizes to metabolically
stressed regions in tumors (degenhardt et al. 2006).
in order to confirm that beclin1+/− ibmk cells have
impaired autophagic survival, viability under ischemia
was determined as described previously (degenhardt et
al. 2006) using a 1% oxygen gas mixture and medium
without glucose that simulates metabolic stress condi-
tions in the tumor microenvironment in vitro (nelson et
downloaded from 
genesdev.cshlp.org
 on march 9, 2015 - published by 
cold spring harbor laboratory press
autophagy limits genomic instability
figure 1. allelic loss of beclin1 impairs cell survival and recovery in vitro and results in defective autophagy in vivo. a panel of
beclin1+/+ and beclin1+/− ibmk cells with and without bcl-2 were subjected to ischemia viability assay and recovery was analyzed for
ultrastructure morphology by em. (a) western blots showing protein expression in beclin1+/+ and beclin1+/− ibmk cells with and
without bcl-2. (b) allelic loss of beclin1 impairs autophagy in tumors in vivo. beclin1+/+ and beclin1+/− ibmk cells were engineered
to stably express egfp-lc3 and were injected subcutaneously into nude mice for tumor formation. photomicrograph of beclin1+/+ and
beclin1+/− tumor sections 1 d post-implantation showing robust activation of autophagy in the wild-type beclin1+/+ ibmk cells and
impaired autophagy in the autophagy-defective beclin1+/− ibmk cells. (c) allelic loss of beclin1 results in susceptibility to metabolic
stress. viability of beclin1+/+ and beclin1+/− ibmk cells with and with out bcl-2 showing diminished survival of the beclin1+/− ibmk
cells in response to ischemia. (d) electron micrograph showing impaired recovery of beclin1+/− ibmk cells expressing bcl-2 following
ischemic stress.
al. 2004). there was no significant difference in sensitiv-
ity observed in the apoptosis-competent beclin1+/+ and
beclin1+/− cells without bcl-2. in contrast, beclin1+/−
cells expressing bcl-2 showed substantial sensitivity to
ischemia when compared with wild-type cells (fig. 1c),
suggesting that metabolic stress is a potent trigger for
genes & development
1369
downloaded from 
genesdev.cshlp.org
 on march 9, 2015 - published by 
cold spring harbor laboratory press
mathew et al.
apoptosis, which readily eliminated apoptosis-compe-
tent cells before autophagy could be manifested.
allelic loss of beclin1 impairs recovery from
metabolic stress
to further understand how this impaired autophagy re-
sponse to metabolic stress may impact homeostasis,
beclin1+/+ and beclin1+/− ibmk cells expressing bcl-2
were subjected to ischemia for 7 d and allowed to re-
cover, and ultrastructural morphology was monitored by
electron microscopy. wild-type beclin1+/+ ibmk cells
expressing bcl-2 transitioned from normal to a con-
densed morphology by the end of 7 d inischemia (fig.
1d) and retained a high level of viability under these
conditions (degenhardt et al. 2006). most wild-type cells
regained their normal morphology b y 4 h ofrecovery,
and almost all did so by 8 h. in stark contrast, mutant
beclin1+/− ibmk cells expressing bcl-2 typically showed
enhanced necrotic morphology and cell death with
highly vacuolated cytoplasm, and there were fewer signs
of reversion to normal morphology even after 8 h of re-
covery (fig. 1d). these observations suggested that au-
tophagy not only promotes survival but also facilitates
recovery from metabolic stress, suggesting that au-
tophagy is a specific process of adaptation to intermit-
tent nutrient depletion to enable high-fidelity restora-
tion of normal cellular functions.
autophagy suppresses the dna damage in response
to metabolic stress
it was unclear how defects in autophagy could diminish
survival while enhancing tumorigenesis. one possible
explanation is that by impairing survival to metabolic
stress, defective autophagy may increase dna damage,
and thereby the mutation rate in the remaining viable
cells, facilitating tumor progression. analogously, muta-
tions in genes critical for dna repair create sensitivity
to dna damage but enhance tumorigenesis by increas-
ing the mutation rate (symington 2002). in order to test
this hypothesis, we evaluated wild-type and autophagy-
deficient ibmk cell lines expressing bcl-2 for ser 139
phosphorylation of histone h2ax (␥-h2ax), signifying
dna double-strand breaks (dsbs) and activation of the
dna damage response in response to metabolic stress
(ischemia). both beclin1+/+ and beclin1+/− ibmk cells ex-
pressing bcl-2 showed a low basal level of nuclear
␥-h2ax staining (fig. 2a,b). wild-type beclin1+/+ ibmk
cells expressing bcl-2 showed a modest induction of
␥-h2ax levels in response to metabolic stress gradually
over the course of 3 d (fig. 2a,b). in contrast, autophagy-
defective beclin1+/− ibmk cells expressing bcl-2 showed
a remarkable increase in levels of ␥-h2ax staining in
response to metabolic stress (fig. 2b). analysis of
␥-h2ax levels by western blotting provided similar re-
sults, showing elevated ␥-h2ax levels in the beclin1+/−
cells expressing bcl-2 (fig. 2c). as a defect in autophagy
may also be associated with other forms of stress such as
1370
genes & development
induction of the unfolded protein response (upr), levels
of grp-78, an early marker for upr, were also exam-
ined. however, no difference in grp-78 induction in
ischemia was evident in wild-type and beclin1 mutant
cells at these time points (fig. 2c). thus, the increased
levels of ␥-h2ax in the beclin1 mutant cells suggested
that defects in autophagy may promote dna damage
induced by metabolic stress.
allelic loss of beclin1 increases the frequency
of centrosome abnormalities
how deficiency in autophagy-mediated survival may
promote tumorigenesis was further suggested by the ac-
cumulation of large cells with abnormally shaped nuclei
under standard tissue culture conditions specifically in
the beclin1+/− ibmk cells expressing bcl-2. to character-
ize the morphological differences between beclin1+/+ and
beclin1+/− ibmk cells expressing bcl-2, the microtu-
bule network, dna, and centrosomes were examined.
beclin1+/+ ibmk cells expressing bcl-2, with an intact
autophagy pathway, maintained a normal cell size with
a uniform microtubule framework, nuclear shape, and
predominantly normal centrosome numbers (one or two
centrosomes per cell) (fig. 3a). in contrast, autophagy-
defective beclin1+/− ibmk cells expressing bcl-2 showed
profound microtubule and centrosome abnormalities, in-
cluding heterogeneity in cell and nuclear size and shape
(fig. 3a) and an increase in the percentage of cells with
centrosome abnormalities including increased centro-
some number (fig. 3b). abnormalities in the microtu-
bule framework can arise due to abnormally large cell
size, and, moreover, supernumerary centrosomes and
large nuclei are defining traits of excess dna content as
well as genomic instability (nigg 2002). these abnor-
malities in beclin1+/− ibmk cells suggested that au-
tophagy and maintenance of metabolism might be cru-
cial for limiting dna damage and maintaining genome
integrity.
allelic loss of beclin1 manifests ploidy abnormalities
in an apoptosis-deficient background
to investigate the potential for genomic instability in
beclin1 mutant cells, the dna content of multiple, in-
dependent beclin1+/+ and beclin1+/− ibmk cell lines
along with their bcl-2-expressing counterparts was de-
termined by flow cytometry. apoptosis-competent
beclin1+/+ and beclin1+/− ibmk cell lines were predomi-
nantly diploid, with only one cell line out of six from
each displaying a mixed population of diploid and aneu-
ploid cells (fig. 3c). therefore, allelic loss of beclin1 did
not grossly alter ploidy, presumably due to the negative
selection for aneuploidy imposed by a functional apopto-
tic pathway. flow cytometry analysis of bcl-2-expressing
beclin1+/+ and beclin1+/− ibmk cell lines, however, re-
vealed a significant increase in the frequency of aneu-
ploidy associated with beclin1 deficiency (fig. 3c). all
eight beclin1+/− ibmk cell lines expressing bcl-2 were
downloaded from 
genesdev.cshlp.org
 on march 9, 2015 - published by 
cold spring harbor laboratory press
autophagy limits genomic instability
figure 2. allelic loss of beclin1 promotes dna damage response under metabolic stress. representative beclin1+/+ (wb-a2) and
beclin1+/− (blnb-a4) ibmk cell lines expressing bcl-2 were subjected to ischemia stress and the dna damage response was measured
by the induction of ␥-h2ax by immunofluorescence and western blotting. (a) representative photomicrographs showing accumu-
lation of ␥-h2ax in the beclin1+/− ibmk cell line expressing bcl-2 (blnb-a4) as a marker of dna damage. (b) quantitation of
␥-h2ax-positive cells in beclin1+/+ (wb-a2) and beclin1+/− (blnb-a4) ibmk cell lines expressing bcl-2 in a. the percentage of nuclei
with positive ␥-h2ax foci was tabulated. data represent mean ± sd. note enhanced accumulation of ␥-h2ax in the beclin1+/− ibmk
cell line expressing bcl-2 (blnb-a4) compared with the wild type. (c) western blot time course showing ␥-h2ax (marker of dna
damage) and grp-78 (marker of upr) in beclin1+/+ (wb-a2) and beclin1+/− (blnb-a4) ibmk cell lines, both expressing bcl-2.
aneuploid, while only one out of eight bcl-2-expressing
beclin1+/+ ibmk cell
lines showed aneuploidy (fig.
3c,d). ploidy abnormalities arose independently and in a
genotype-specific manner (fig. 3e). overall, these obser-
vations suggested that impairment of autophagy pro-
moted abnormalities in centrosome and dna content
that were preserved in an apoptosis-defective back-
ground.
allelic loss of beclin1 and defective autophagy
promote numerical and structural
chromosome abnormalities
increases in centrosome numbers and cellular dna con-
tent are often caused by a numerical increase in chromo-
some numbers. to further investigate the role of allelic
loss of beclin1 and impaired autophagy in the accumu-
lation of dna content abnormalities, we determined the
average metaphase chromosome number of beclin1+/+
and beclin1+/− ibmk cells with and without bcl-2. au-
tophagy-competent beclin1+/+ ibmk cells showed a near-
normal diploid chromosome number with a group aver-
age of 38 (the normal mouse chromosome number is 40)
irrespective of bcl-2 expression (fig. 4a,b), and allelic
loss of beclin1 had a marginal impact on the average
chromosome number when apoptosis was functional
(group average, 42) (fig. 4a,b). the wild-type beclin1+/+
ibmk cells expressing bcl-2 also showed a near-normal
diploid chromosome number (group average, 38). in con-
trast, beclin1+/− ibmk cells expressing bcl-2 displayed a
profound increase in metaphase chromosomes with a
near-triploid average chromosome number (group aver-
age, 56) (fig. 4a,b), suggesting that autophagy suppresses
aneuploidy. along with numerical chromosomal abnor-
malities, beclin1+/− ibmk cells expressing bcl-2 also dis-
played significant structural abnormalities, including
the presence of double-minute chromosomes (fig. 4a,
red arrows), suggesting the possibility of increased gene
amplification (gebhart 2005).
as these ibmk cell lines were derived from normal
primary epithelial cells, defective autophagy may facili-
tate gradual accumulation of chromosome aberrations
permitted by inactivation of checkpoints (p53 and prb
pathways) and are further manifested by impaired apo-
genes & development
1371
downloaded from 
genesdev.cshlp.org
 on march 9, 2015 - published by 
cold spring harbor laboratory press
mathew et al.
figure 3. allelic loss of beclin1 promotes nuclear, centrosome, and ploidy abnormalities. beclin1+/+ and beclin1+/− ibmk cells with
and without bcl-2 were analyzed by fluorescence microscopy and also for dna content by flow cytometry. (a) representative
photomicrographs of beclin1+/+ and beclin1+/− ibmk cells expressing bcl-2 (wb-a2 and wb-d1, blnb-a4, and blnb-c2) stained by
indirect immunofluorescence for microtubules (anti-␣-tubulin), dna (dapi), and centrosomes (anti-␥-tubulin). note the extensive
microtubule network, the heterogeneous nuclear size, and the accumulation of structural and numerical abnormalities in centrosomes
in beclin1+/− mutants (indicated by arrows). (b) quantitation of centrosome numbers in a. percentage of cells with normal centrosome
numbers (one or two; blue bars) and with supernumerary centrosomes (more than two; purple bars). data represent the mean ± sd. (c)
flow cytometry analysis of a panel of beclin1+/+ and beclin1+/− ibmk cell lines showing their dna content. a beclin1+/+ ibmk cell
line (w4-b1) with a diploid dna content was used as normal control for the analysis (shown in green in each panel). note the high
prevalence of an aneuploid dna content in the beclin1+/− mutants expressing bcl-2. (d) summary of the dna content analyses in c
showing the p value by two-tailed fisher’s exact test. (e) lineage of the cell lines used in the study with their ploidy status, showing
independent, genotype-specific emergence of ploidy abnormalities.
ptosis. in order to determine when these ploidy abnor-
malities arose, we examined the early passages (passage
5) of both beclin1+/+ and beclin1+/− bcl-2-expressing
ibmk cell lines shown in figure 3c for their dna con-
tent. indeed, seven of the eight early passage beclin1+/+
ibmk cell lines expressing bcl-2 showed a diploid dna
1372
genes & development
downloaded from 
genesdev.cshlp.org
 on march 9, 2015 - published by 
cold spring harbor laboratory press
autophagy limits genomic instability
figure 4. beclin1+/− ibmk cells demonstrate chromosomal instability. the panel of beclin1+/+ and beclin1+/− ibmk cells with and
without bcl-2 was analyzed for chromosome number in metaphase spreads and a subset of these cell lines were analyzed for ploidy
changes in tissue culture by flow cytometry. (a) cells were treated with nocodazole (0.5 µg/ml) and metaphase chromosomes were
prepared (brown and baltimore 2000). the panel shows representative photomicrographs from at least 100 geimsa-stained mitotic
figures from each genotype. the diploid beclin1+/+ ibmk cell line, w4-b1, is shown as a control for each genotype. note the enhanced
numerical and structural abnormalities in the beclin1+/− ibmk cells expressing bcl-2, with arrows indicating double-minute chromo-
somes. (b) scatter plot of the chromosome numbers showing the mean (data point to the left) and the median (data point to the right)
values in each cell line. one-hundred metaphases were scored for each cell line. average of the mean chromosome numbers in each
group is shown as a horizontal black line for each genotype. (c) flow cytometry analysis of passages 5 and 25 of bcl-2-expressing
beclin1+/+ and beclin1+/− ibmk cell lines (red) showing transition from the diploid to aneuploid state. the cell lines were maintained
in parallel in the same culture conditions. the diploid beclin1+/+ ibmk cell line, w4-b1 (shown in green), was used as a control.
content, and aneuploidy was observed in only one cell
line (wb-b1), as was observed before. in contrast, aneu-
ploidy was evident in six of the eight beclin1+/− ibmk
cell lines expressing bcl-2 as early as passage 5. interest-
ingly, two of the eight early passage beclin1+/− ibmk cell
lines expressing bcl-2 (blnb-a4 and blnb-c2) that
showed aneuploidy at a later passage number (fig. 3c)
were diploid at passage 5, suggesting that aneuploidy in
these two cell lines arose during passage in tissue cul-
ture. continued propagation in vitro, however, resulted
in conversion of the diploid beclin1+/−, but not the
beclin1+/+, ibmk cells expressing bcl-2 to aneuploid cells
(fig. 4c). this suggested that normal tissue culture con-
stituted a level of metabolic stress that may be sufficient
to manifest as genomic instability in autophagy-defi-
cient cells. thus, constitutive autophagy functions to
suppress chromosomal instability that occurs gradually
over time in culture, perhaps due to low levels of con-
stitutive metabolic stress, and that apoptosis plays a role
in the elimination of these cells from the population.
indeed, a constitutive level of autophagy in the range of
1%–10% of the cell population is readily apparent in
bcl-2-expressing or bax/bak-deficient ibmk cells, which
is reduced by allelic loss of or rna interference for
beclin1 (degenhardt et al. 2006).
allelic loss of beclin1 is associated with gene
amplification and chromosome gains and losses
to arrive at the mechanism of enhanced chromosome
instability induced by the allelic loss of beclin1, particu-
larly the formation of double-minute chromosomes, we
explored the possibility that autophagy suppressed dna
damage and thereby gene amplification. gene amplifica-
tion, a major mechanism of oncogene activation and
resistance to chemotherapy, results from dna dsbs
genes & development
1373
downloaded from 
genesdev.cshlp.org
 on march 9, 2015 - published by 
cold spring harbor laboratory press
mathew et al.
(little and chartrand 2004). it is facilitated by the inac-
tivation of the p53 dna damage checkpoint (living-
stone et al. 1992; white et al. 1994), increased oxidative
stress (in particular by h2o2) (mondello et al. 2002), and
defects in dna repair (lin et al. 2001). moreover, gene
amplification is the known mechanism of resistance to
n-phosphonacetyl-l-aspartate (pala) that prevents de
novo pyrimidine biosynthesis through the inhibition of
carbamoyl-p synthetase/aspartate transcarbamylase/di-
hydroorotase (cad) enzyme complex and selects for
cad gene amplification (livingstone et al. 1992). to as-
say for the propensity for gene amplification, we tested
for the frequency of pala resistance in beclin1+/+ and
beclin1+/− ibmk cell lines.
autophagy-defective, beclin1+/− ibmk cells displayed
∼50-fold to >1000-fold increase in the rate of colony for-
mation in pala in comparison with the beclin1+/+
ibmk cells at five times the pala ld50, independent of
apoptosis deficiency (fig. 5a,b). inhibition of apoptosis
further enhanced the frequency of pala resistance in
beclin1+/− cell lines, but only by several-fold (fig. 5b). it
should be noted that beclin1+/− colonies grew in the pres-
figure 5. allelic loss of beclin1 promotes pala resistance and chromosome gain and losses. multiple independent clones of
beclin1+/+ and beclin1+/− ibmk cell lines with and without bcl-2 were subjected to pala selection (livingstone et al. 1992) and acgh
(kallioniemi et al. 1992). (a) representative photomicrographs showing pala-resistant colonies (100 µm). pala selection was
performed using three and five times the ld50 concentration (60 µm and 100 µm, respectively). (b) quantitation of the frequency of
pala resistance in beclin1+/+ and beclin1+/− ibmk cells with or without bcl-2. the frequency of pala resistance was determined as
the number of resistance colonies per 3 × 105 cells. (c) pala-resistant clones display cad gene amplification in cad-specific pcr.
panel shows pcr reaction product (for indicated number of cycles) (756 bp) from the genomic dna isolated from untreated (u) or
pala-treated (t) beclin1+/− ibmk cells expressing bcl-2. (d) representative whole-genome dna copy number profile by acgh for
beclin1+/+ (w4-b1, w4-c1, wb-3, wb-a2, wb-d1) and beclin1+/− (bln-4-1, bln-34-3, blnb-13, blnb-a4, blnb-c2) ibmk cell lines
with and without bcl-2 showing enhanced gains and losses of chromosomes in the beclin1+/− mutants. plotted are log2 transformed
hybridization ratios of the genomic dna isolated from the cell line to genomic dna from the normal isogenic mouse kidney. (e)
summary of specific chromosome gains (blue bars) and losses (purple bars) in beclin1+/+ and beclin1+/− ibmk cell lines (n = 5 for each).
complete or partial chromosomal dose variations are represented as frequencies. note the significant and widespread chromosomal
dosage variations in the beclin1+/− ibmk cells (two-tailed fisher’s exact test; p = 0.003).
1374
genes & development
downloaded from 
genesdev.cshlp.org
 on march 9, 2015 - published by 
cold spring harbor laboratory press
ence of pala (fig. 5a), indicating that this was true drug
resistance and not merely failure of autophagic cell
death. beclin1+/+ ibmk cells without bcl-2 expression
showed substantially lower frequencies for pala resis-
tance, which was marginally increased by an apoptotic
block by bcl-2 (fig. 5b). indeed, pala-resistant clones
demonstrated amplification of the cad gene (fig. 5c).
these data suggested that defective autophagy promotes
drug resistance by gene amplification, which is further
enhanced by defective apoptosis.
the increased frequency of gene amplification ob-
served in the beclin1+/− ibmk cells prompted us to ana-
lyze the chromosomes of beclin1+/+ and beclin1+/− ibmk
cell lines for random gains and losses by microarray-
based comparative genome hybridization (acgh) (kal-
lioniemi et al. 1992). random chromosomal gains or
losses occurred with low frequency in the autophagy-
competent beclin1+/+ ibmk cell lines and were limited
to fewer chromosomes in comparison with beclin1+/−
ibmk cell lines, which showed widespread chromo-
somal gains and losses in nearly all of the chromosomes
(fig. 5d,e). as acgh detects only relative copy number
variations and not ploidy, the increased chromosomal
gains and losses observed in the acgh data do not ad-
dress absolute chromosome variations that were appar-
ent in the mitotic spreads and the dna content analysis
(figs. 3, 4). nevertheless, these data suggested that bec-
lin1 heterozygocity enhanced gene dosage variations,
which may accompany the gross ploidy abnormalities
observed by flow cytometry analysis.
inhibition of pyrimidine biosynthesis triggers
autophagy that suppresses dna damage
the induction of gene amplification in the beclin1 mu-
tant cells raised the intriguing possibility that pala and
the resulting pyrimidine starvation, which itself may be
a form of metabolic stress, promotes autophagy induc-
tion. therefore, we tested the relative induction of au-
tophagy in beclin1+/+ and beclin1+/− ibmk cells in re-
sponse to pala by cytoplasmic-to-membrane trans-
location of egfp-lc3 in stably expressing cells. consti-
tutive autophagy levels were low in both beclin1+/+ and
beclin1+/− ibmk cells expressing bcl-2. within 48 h of
pala exposure (60 µm), wild-type beclin1+/+ ibmk cells
expressing bcl-2 showed significant induction of au-
tophagy (50%), and this induction of autophagy was sig-
nificantly diminished (9%) in the mutant beclin1+/−
ibmk cells expressing bcl-2 (fig. 6a,b). this demon-
strated that pharmacologic depletion of pyrimidines trig-
gers autophagy.
pala depletes pyrimidine nucleotide (dntp) pools,
and in checkpoint-deficient cells this can induce repli-
cation stress and dna damage. autophagy-deficient
cells may be particularly prone to this highly specific
form of metabolic stress, which may enhance replication
stress and dna damage. therefore, we tested the
dna damage response following pala exposure in both
beclin1+/+ and beclin1+/− ibmk cells by assessing the
accumulation of ␥-h2ax, an early marker for dsbs.
autophagy limits genomic instability
low levels of basal dna damage were observed in both
beclin1+/+ and beclin1+/− ibmk cells expressing bcl-2
(figs. 2b,c, 6c,d). ␥-h2ax staining was dramatically in-
creased following pala exposure in the mutant
beclin1+/− ibmk cells expressing bcl-2, while in the
wild-type cells this increase was significantly less (fig.
6c,d). indeed, western blot analysis confirmed accumu-
lation of ␥-h2ax in beclin1+/− ibmk cells (fig. 6e). fur-
thermore, no induction of grp-78 indicative of upr was
observed (fig. 6e).
deficiency in atg5 confers susceptibility
to metabolic stress
in order to establish if the susceptibility to metabolic
stress and genomic instability were due to defective au-
tophagy, and not limited to allelic loss of beclin1, im-
mortalized ibmk cell lines were derived from mice de-
ficient for the essential autophagy gene atg5 (kuma et al.
2004). multiple independent ibmk cell lines were de-
rived from atg5+/+, atg5+/−, and atg5−/− mice, and west-
ern blot analysis confirmed the absence of atg5 protein
expression in atg5−/− (fig. 7a) and reduced expression in
the atg5+/− (data not shown) compared with atg5+/+
ibmk cell lines (fig. 7a). all ibmk cell lines expressed
e1a and p53dd as expected (fig. 7a). to confirm that
loss of atg5 impaired autophagy under metabolic
stress, the wild-type, heterozygous, and deficient atg5
ibmk cells (6.1, 5.1, and 7.1) transiently expressing lc3-
egfp were subjected to metabolic stress, and the per-
centage of membrane translocation indicative of au-
tophagy was determined. all cell lines had low levels of
egfp-lc3 translocation under normal growth condi-
tions, whereas metabolic stress induced a dramatic up-
regulation of autophagy in the atg5+/+ that was reduced
in the atg5+/− and negligible in the atg5−/− ibmk cell
lines (fig. 7b, percentage autophagy indicated in the top
right corner of the panels). in order to test if defective
autophagy due to loss of atg5 also impaired survival
under metabolic stress, these cell lines were monitored
by long-term computerized video time-lapse microscopy
(cvtl). atg5+/+ ibmk cell lines were minimally affected
at 24 h with morphological signs of apoptosis becoming
apparent at 48 h of metabolic stress, as expected (fig. 7b).
in comparison with the atg5+/+, at the same time points,
apoptosis was accelerated in atg5+/− and was markedly
pronounced in the atg5−/− ibmk cell lines (fig. 7b). thus,
deficiency in atg5 compromises both autophagy and
survival
in metabolic stress, as does allelic loss of
beclin1 (fig. 1c; degenhardt et al. 2006), but does so to
a greater extent. this suggests that impaired survival to
metabolic stress in cancer cells is independent of the
means of autophagy inactivation as reported previously
(degenhardt et al. 2006).
atg5 deficiency promotes activation of the dna
damage response
to determine if the enhanced susceptibility to metabolic
stress conferred by atg5 deficiency also resulted in an
genes & development
1375
downloaded from 
genesdev.cshlp.org
 on march 9, 2015 - published by 
cold spring harbor laboratory press
mathew et al.
figure 6. pala-induced autophagy is
impaired leading to the accumulation of
dna damage response in beclin1+/− cells
and not in the beclin1+/+ cells. alleleic
loss of beclin1 results in impaired au-
tophagy and sustains enhanced dna dam-
age response in response to pala treat-
ment when compared with the corre-
(a) repre-
sponding wild-type cell line.
sentative photomicrographs of beclin1+/+
(wb-13 lc3) and beclin1+/− (blnb-13
lc3) ibmk cell lines stably expressing
egfp-lc3, showing the lack of egfp-lc3
localization in the beclin1+/− (blnb-13
lc3) ibmk cell lines indicating impaired
autophagy in response to pala treatment
(60 µm). (b) quantitation of the percentage
of egfp-lc3 translocation indicative of
autophagy in a as described previously
(degenhardt et al. 2006). data represent
mean ± sd. note that autophagy induc-
tion in the beclin1+/− was approximately
fivefold less than the wild-type cells even
after 48 h of pala treatment. (c) repre-
sentative photomicrographs of ␥-h2ax
immunostaining in beclin1+/+ ibmk cells
expressing
and
beclin1+/− ibmk cells expressing bcl-2
(blnb-13 lc3) following pala treatment
showing enhanced dna damage response
in the beclin1+/− ibmk cells expressing
bcl-2 compared with the wild-type cells.
(d) quantitation of percentage of ␥-h2ax-
positive cells is shown in c. data repre-
sent mean ± sd. (e) western blots show-
ing ␥-h2ax and grp-78 levels
in
beclin1+/+ (wb-a2) and beclin1+/− (blnb-
a4) ibmk cells, both expressing bcl-2.
(wb-13
bcl-2
lc3)
enhanced dna damage response, as observed with alle-
lic loss of beclin1, the appearance of ␥-h2ax nuclear
staining was monitored under normal and stress condi-
tions. autophagy-defective, atg5−/− cells had a slightly
higher level of ␥-h2ax staining under normal growth
conditions that was substantially increased by metabolic
stress compared with wild-type atg5+/+ cells (fig. 7c,d).
to test if autophagy dependent on atg5 further en-
abled viability and suppressed dna damage under meta-
bolic stress in cells with a defect in apoptosis, as does
beclin1, atg5+/+ and atg5−/− ibmk cell lines were engi-
neered to express bcl-2 along with vector controls (fig.
7e). when subjected to metabolic stress for 10 d followed
by recovery for 2 d, bcl-2-expressing atg5−/− ibmk cell
lines displayed gross abnormalities in nuclear morphol-
ogy (increased size and irregular shape indicative of chro-
mosome instability)
(fig. 7f,g), associated with dra-
matic impairment in clonogenic survival compared with
bcl-2-expressing atg5+/+ ibmk cells (fig. 7h). although
atg5 deficiency reduced survival to metabolic stress even
in the presence of an apoptotic block (data not shown), as
observed for allelic loss of beclin1 (fig. 1c; degenhardt
et al. 2006), this survival deficit was greatly accentuated
upon replenishment of nutrients and oxygen (fig. 7h).
1376
genes & development
impaired recovery following metabolic stress was also
observed in bcl-2-expressing beclin1+/− ibmk cells (fig.
1d). this suggested that defects in autophagy resulted in
increased genome damage in stress conditions that were
manifested more prominently when cells were returned
to normal growth conditions. to test this, bcl-2-express-
ing atg5+/+ and atg5−/− ibmk cell lines were monitored
for ␥-h2ax-positive nuclei under stress conditions and
recovery. bcl-2-expressing atg5+/+ ibmk cells showed
few ␥-h2ax-positive nuclei, the occurrence of which
was modestly increased by stress, as expected (fig. 7i,j).
in contrast, bcl-2-expressing atg5−/− ibmk cells dis-
played a marked increase in ␥-h2ax-positive nuclei dur-
ing both stress and recovery (fig. 7i,j). thus, inactivation
of autophagy by either allelic loss of beclin1 or defi-
ciency in atg5 amplified the cellular response to dna
damage and increased the susceptibility to metabolic
stress. this supports a role for the autophagy pathway in
suppressing genome damage and enabling survival of
cancer cells under conditions of starvation. inactivation
of cell cycle checkpoints and apoptosis in cancer cells
may allow further manifestation of genome damage re-
sulting from defective autophagy, contributing to tumor
progression.
downloaded from 
genesdev.cshlp.org
 on march 9, 2015 - published by 
cold spring harbor laboratory press
autophagy limits genomic instability
figure 7. atg5 deficiency impairs survival and promotes dna damage response under metabolic stress. (a) western blot showing
protein expression levels in parental atg5+/+ and atg5−/− ibmk cell lines. (b) frames from 2-d time-lapse videos of atg5+/+ (6.1), atg5+/−
(5.1), and atg5−/− (7.1) cells performed as described previously (degenhardt et al. 2006), showing differential survival under ischemia
for the indicated time points. numbers represent percentage of cells with lc3-egfp translocation from a total of 300 cells, indicative
of autophagy at the indicated time points. (c) representative photomicrographs showing induction of ␥-h2ax in atg5+/+ and atg5−/−
parental ibmk cell lines (6.1 and 7.1) in response to ischemia treatment for 48 h. (d) quantitation of ␥-h2ax-positive cells in atg5+/+
(6.1) and atg5−/− (7.1) ibmk cell lines in c. data represent mean ± sd. (e) western blot showing protein expression levels for two
independent atg5+/+ and atg5−/− ibmk cell lines expressing bcl-2 (6.1b2, 6.1b3, 7.1b4, and 7.1b5 respectively) and corresponding vector
controls (6.1v1, 6.1v2, 7.1v1, and 7.1v2). (f) representative photomicrographs of atg5+/+ and atg5−/− ibmk cells expressing bcl-2
showing dapi-stained nuclei untreated (left) or treated with metabolic stress (right) for 10 d followed by 2 d of recovery. note the gross
abnormality in nuclear size and shape in the atg5−/− cells (yellow arrow). (g) quantitation of nuclear size in atg5+/+ and atg5−/− ibmk
cell lines expressing bcl-2, shown in f. data represent mean ± sd. (h) relative clonogenic survival in atg5+/+ and atg5−/− ibmk cell
lines expressing bcl-2 (6.1b2 and 7.1b4) following 10 d ischemia an d 2 d ofrecovery. data represent mean ± sd. (i) representative
photomicrographs showing induction of ␥-h2ax in atg5+/+ and atg5−/− ibmk cell lines expressing bcl-2 (6.1b2 and 7.1b4). (j) quan-
titation of percentage of ␥-h2ax-positive nuclei in bcl-2-expressing atg5+/+ and atg5−/− ibmk cells shown in i. data represent
mean ± sd.
genes & development
1377
downloaded from 
genesdev.cshlp.org
 on march 9, 2015 - published by 
cold spring harbor laboratory press
mathew et al.
discussion
the results described here demonstrate that autophagy
functions to limit dna damage and chromosomal insta-
bility, which may explain its tumor suppressor activity.
thus, our study provides the first mechanistic link be-
tween the regulation of metabolism and genome integ-
rity. we report here that impaired autophagy rendered
beclin1+/− and atg5−/− ibmk cells susceptible to meta-
bolic stress in vitro. this impaired survival in autopha-
gy-deficient cells, however, was overcome by an in-
creased mutation rate and chromosomal instability re-
sulting in accelerated progression to aneuploidy, the
hallmark of cancer, providing an explanation as to why
the loss of this survival pathway can function to sup-
press tumorigenesis. we found that these abnormalities
in autophagy-deficient cells were also accompanied by
an increased dna damage response. interestingly, py-
rimidine starvation triggered autophagy, the defect in
which was sufficient to promote a dna damage re-
sponse and gene amplification in autophagy-deficient
cells. hence, our data suggest that constitutive and
stress-induced autophagy function to limit dna damage
and maintain genomic integrity, thereby identifying a
novel, but not necessarily the only, role for defective
autophagy in promoting oncogenesis.
defective autophagy, metabolism, and
chromosomal instability
we have shown earlier that a defect in apoptosis enables
survival to metabolic stress through autophagy, and that
concomitant impairment of apoptosis and autophagy
pathways results in necrotic cell death in response to
metabolic stress, functioning as a non-cell-autonomous
mechanism to promote tumorigenesis (degenhardt et al.
2006). our current findings suggest that autophagy also
has a more direct role in suppressing tumorigenesis
through the maintenance of genome integrity. metabolic
stress is a common occurrence in human solid tumors
(folkman 2003) that functions as a potent trigger for
apoptosis (nelson et al. 2004). therefore, autophagy as
an alternate means for energy production may be benefi-
cial for tumor cells to mitigate metabolic stress. in nor-
mal development, the lack of autophagy in atg5−/− mice
impairs survival in heart tissue during neonatal starva-
tion, leading to early lethality (kuma et al. 2004). nev-
ertheless, defects in autophagy promote tumorigenesis
despite conferring an impediment to survival, as autoph-
agy-defective beclin1+/− ibmk cells are more tumori-
genic than the autophagy-competent beclin1+/+ ibmk
cells (degenhardt et al. 2006). therefore, the enhanced
gene amplification and chromosomal
instability ob-
served in the mutant beclin1+/− cells expressing bcl-2
may enable cells to overcome the survival deficit by pro-
moting tumorigenesis through an increased mutation
rate. this observation is analogous to the increased tu-
morigenicity of cells with defects in dna repair that
also creates sensitivity to dna-damaging agents and
ionizing radiation while facilitating the accumulation of
oncogenic mutations (symington 2002).
1378
genes & development
metabolic stress, gene amplification,
and tumorigenesis
tumorigenesis results from the accumulation of muta-
tions that, our evidence suggests, is facilitated by defi-
cient metabolism due to defective autophagy. au-
tophagy deficiency in atg5−/− neonates results in lethal
levels of energy depletion and low amino acid concen-
trations in plasma and tissues that impair normal heart
function (kuma et al. 2004). insufficient generation of
atp for vital cellular processes such as dna replication
or repair in autophagy-deficient cells may lead to stalled
replication forks and breakage–fusion–bridge cycles lead-
ing to gene amplification and tumorigenesis (hellman et
al. 2002; narayanan et al. 2006; jin and white 2007).
moreover, the basal housekeeping function of autophagy
is required for protein quality control and homeostasis,
as neuronal cells impaired for autophagy accumulate
polyubiquitinated proteins (hara et al. 2006; komatsu et
al. 2006). in keeping with this finding, we observed that
autophagy-defective beclin1+/− and atg5−/− cells with
bcl-2 also showed poor recovery from ischemic stress,
with accumulation of vacuolated cytoplasm and other
cellular aggregates. damage to critical cellular proteins
that control mitosis or centrosome function in au-
tophagy-deficient cells can be a cause of chromosomal
instability. in addition, excessive generation of reactive
oxygen species due to inefficient removal of damaged
mitochondria is another possible mechanism by which
defective autophagy can promote dna damage and tu-
morigenesis (jin 2006). whether any or all of these
mechanisms are responsible for genome alterations in
autophagy-defective cells remains to be determined.
gene amplification, a consequence of permissive lev-
els of dsbs, is the major mechanism of oncogene acti-
vation in solid tumors, as exemplified by myc, egfr, and
erbb2 (shen et al. 1986; hennessy et al. 2005; albertson
2006). gene amplification also leads to acentric, extra-
chromosomal fragments called double minutes, a com-
mon chromosomal aberration found in human solid tu-
mors (albertson et al. 2003). furthermore, most human
tumors display aneuploidy in the form of a near triploid
dna content (barlogie et al. 1982), but the mechanism
by which this is achieved is not clearly understood. by
suppressing dna damage under stress, autophagy may
suppress progression to aneuploidy as a tumor suppres-
sor mechanism.
in summary, our data suggest that reduced autophagy
promotes dna damage, gene amplification, chromo-
some instability, and aneuploidy, all of which are clini-
cally associated with tumor progression and poor prog-
nosis. similar findings with allelic loss of beclin1 in
immortalized breast epithelial cells (v. karantza-wads-
worth, pers. comm.) and immortalized, autophagy-defec-
tive atg5−/− mouse embryo fibroblasts (mefs) (s. jin,
pers. comm.) suggest that these observations are inde-
pendent of tissue type. analogous to the mammalian
central nervous system where targeted deletion of either
atg5 or atg7 revealed the protective role of constitutive
autophagy through prevention of the accumulation of
downloaded from 
genesdev.cshlp.org
 on march 9, 2015 - published by 
cold spring harbor laboratory press
polyubiquitinated proteins and neurodegeneration (hara
et al. 2006; komatsu et al. 2006), in tumor cells, prevent-
ing the genome damage through autophagy may be an
essential cell-autonomous mechanism for tumor sup-
pression.
autophagy defects, genomic instability, and novel
therapeutic strategies
identification of a novel role of autophagy in limiting
chromosomal instability offers new insight into our un-
derstanding of how autophagy modulates genomic integ-
rity and impacts tumorigenesis. moreover, the finding
that autophagy functions to limit chromosomal instabil-
ity may have implications in rational chemotherapy and
chemoprevention. as tumor cells frequently acquire de-
fects in autophagy, pharmacological activation of au-
tophagy may serve to limit genome damage and tumori-
genesis. alternatively, in established aggressive cancers
with defects in apoptosis, inhibiting the autophagy sur-
vival pathway can be therapeutically exploited to pro-
mote other modes of cell death such as metabolic catas-
trophe, redirecting the cells to an acute necrotic cell
death (jin and white 2007).
materials and methods
generation of stable cell lines
primary epithelial cells were isolated from beclin1+/+ and
beclin1+/− mice (generously provided by dr. zhenyu yue,
mount sinai school of medicine, new york, ny) and were im-
mortalized by the inactivation of the retinoblastoma (rb) and
p53 pathways (degenhardt et al. 2002, 2006), and four indepen-
dent clones of each were transfected with the vector (w4-a1,
w4-b1, w4-c1, w4-e1, and bln-a3, bln-b2, bln-c3, bln-
d1) or were engineered to express bcl-2 (wb-a2, wb-b1, wb-
d1, wb-d3, and blnb-a4, blnb-b1, blnb-c2, blnb-d1), ex-
panding the original pool of cell lines (degenhardt et al. 2006)
from 12 to 28. primary epithelial cells were isolated from
atg5+/+, atg5+/−, and atg5−/− newborn mice (kindly provided by
dr. noboru mizushima, tokyo metropolitan institute of medi-
cal sciences, tokyo, japan) and immortalized as previously de-
scribed (degenhardt et al. 2002) to generate atg5+/+ (6.1), atg5+/−
(5.1), and atg5−/− (7.1) ibmk cell lines. wild-type atg5 (6.1) and
atg5−/− (7.1) ibmk cells were then transfected with vector
(6.1v2, 6.1v3) or were engineered to express bcl-2 (6.1b4, 6.1b5).
western blotting, immunofluorescence, and
electron microscopy
western blotting,
immunofluorescence, and em were per-
formed as previously described (nelson et al. 2004; degenhardt
et al. 2006). western blotting and immunofluoresce were per-
formed using the following antibodies: anti-beclin1, anti-bcl-2
(santa cruz biotechnology); anti-p53 (ab-1), anti-e1a, and anti-
actin (oncogene); anti-␣-tubulin (calbiochem); dna (dapi,
sigma); anti-␥-tubulin (axel); anti-␥h2ax (s139) (upstate bio-
technology); anti-atg5 (mizushima et al. 2001).
autophagy limits genomic instability
lated using image-pro plus software. briefly, representative pho-
tomicrographs (600×) were taken and nuclear boundaries were
determined using histogram-based segmentation, and areas
were calculated and relative nuclear sizes were expressed in µ2.
measurement of the frequency of pala-resistant clones
the ld50 of pala in beclin1+/+ and beclin1+/− ibmk cells (105/
10-cm dish) was determined by treating the cells with varying
concentrations of pala (0–100 µm) (drug synthesis and chem-
istry branch, national cancer institute) for 3 d and determining
the cell viability by trypan blue exclusion. the frequency of
pala resistance was determined to be the number of pala-
resistant clones formed per 3 × 105 cells following treatment
with 3× ld50 and 5× ld50 concentrations of pala (60 µm and
100 µm, respectively) for 10–14 d. pala-containing medium
was replaced every 3–4 d. colonies were fixed in methanol,
stained with geimsa, and photographed.
pcr for cad gene amplification
genomic dna was isolated from multiple independent pala-
resistant (100 µm) colonies of beclin1+/− ibmk cells expressing
bcl-2. a 756-base-pair (bp) fragment flanking two exons that
correspond to the mus musculus cad gene (accession no.
nm_023525)
from mouse chromosome 5 (accession no.
ac_109608) was amplified from genomic dna by pcr using
the following set of primers: 4-fwd (5⬘-ggagctggagactc
cgacg-3⬘) and 4-rev (5⬘-ctaatgaacaggaagatccgg
tatc-3⬘).
the pcr reaction was performed for the indicated number of
cycles (fig. 6c) to compare relative amplification in the linear
range.
acgh
acgh was performed as described previously (kallioniemi et al.
1994). briefly, genomic dna from beclin1+/+ and beclin1+/−
ibmk cells and the normal mouse tissue was isolated, fluores-
cent-labeled, and hybridized to a bac array (snijders et al. 2001)
in triplicate. for each cell line, the data were plotted in genome
order as the mean log2 ratio of the triplicate spots. an average
log2 ratio of more than ±0.5 was considered as a loss or gain.
acknowledgments
we thank nathaniel heintz and zhenyu yue for providing
beclin1+/+ and beclin1+/− mice; noboru mizushima for provid-
ing atg5+/+, atg5+/−, and atg5−/− mice, the anti-mouse atg5 an-
tibody, and egfp-lc3 plasmid; the drug synthesis and chem-
istry branch, national cancer institute, bethesda, md, for the
generous gift of pala; haiyan zhang and yong zhang for help
with generation of atg5 cell lines; petra pham and theresa hy-
ejeong choi for assistance with the flow cytometry; dr. kane-
goldsmith for assistance with confocal microscopy; and raj
patel for assistance with electron microscopy. we also thank
thomasina sharkey for assistance with the preparation of the
manuscript. this work was supported by a grant from the na-
tional institutes of health (r37 ca53370) and the howard
hughes medical institute (to e.w).
dapi staining and quantitation of nuclear size
dapi staining of the nuclei was performed as described previ-
ously (nelson et al. 2004). relative nuclear sizes were calcu-
aita, v.m., liang, x.h., murty, v.v., pincus, d.l., yu, w., caya-
nis, e., kalachikov, s., gilliam, t.c., and levine, b. 1999.
cloning and genomic organization of beclin 1, a candidate
references
genes & development
1379
downloaded from 
genesdev.cshlp.org
 on march 9, 2015 - published by 
cold spring harbor laboratory press
mathew et al.
tumor suppressor gene on chromosome 17q21. genomics
59: 59–65.
albertson, d.g. 2006. gene amplification in cancer. trends
genet. 22: 447–455.
albertson, d.g., collins, c., mccormick, f., and gray, j.w.
2003. chromosome aberrations in solid tumors. nat. genet.
34: 369–376.
anglade, p., vyas, s., javoy-agid, f., herrero, m.t., michel, p.p.,
marquez, j., mouatt-prigent, a., ruberg, m., hirsch, e.c.,
and agid, y. 1997. apoptosis and autophagy in nigral neu-
rons of patients with parkinson’s disease. histol. histo-
pathol. 12: 25–31.
baehrecke, e.h. 2003. autophagic programmed cell death in
drosophila. cell death differ. 10: 940–945.
barlogie, b., johnston, d.a., smallwood, l., raber, m.n., mad-
dox, a.m., latreille, j., swartzendruber, d.e., and drewinko,
b. 1982. prognostic implications of ploidy and proliferative
activity in human solid tumors. cancer genet. cytogenet. 6:
17–28.
brown, e.j. and baltimore, d. 2000. atr disruption leads to
chromosomal fragmentation and early embryonic lethality.
genes & dev. 14: 397–402.
cataldo, a.m., hamilton, d.j., and nixon, r.a. 1994. lyso-
somal abnormalities in degenerating neurons link neuronal
compromise to senile plaque development in alzheimer dis-
ease. brain res. 640: 68–80.
degenhardt, k., sundararajan, r., lindsten, t., thompson, c.,
and white, e. 2002. bax and bak independently promote cy-
tochrome c release from mitochondria. j. biol. chem. 277:
14127–14134.
degenhardt, k., mathew, r., beaudoin, b., bray, k., anderson,
d., chen, g., mukherjee, c., shi, y., gelinas, c., fan, y., et
al. 2006. autophagy promotes tumor cell survival and re-
stricts necrosis, inflammation, and tumorigenesis. cancer
cell 10: 51–64.
folkman, j. 2003. angiogenesis and apoptosis. semin. cancer
biol. 13: 159–167.
gebhart, e. 2005. double minutes, cytogenetic equivalents of
gene amplification, in human neoplasia—a review. clin.
transl. oncol. 7: 477–485.
gomez-santos, c., ferrer, i., santidrian, a.f., barrachina, m.,
gil, j., and ambrosio, s. 2003. dopamine induces autophagic
cell death and ␣-synuclein increase in human neuroblastoma
sh-sy5y cells. j. neurosci. res. 73: 341–350.
hara, t., nakamura, k., matsui, m., yamamoto, a., nakahara,
y., suzuki-migishima, r., yokoyama, m., mishima, k.,
saito, i., okano, h., et al. 2006. suppression of basal autoph-
agy in neural cells causes neurodegenerative disease in mice.
nature 441: 885–889.
hellman, a., zlotorynski, e., scherer, s.w., cheung, j., vincent,
j.b., smith, d.i., trakhtenbrot, l., and kerem, b. 2002. a role
for common fragile site induction in amplification of human
oncogenes. cancer cell 1: 89–97.
hennessy, b.t., smith, d.l., ram, p.t., lu, y., and mills, g.b.
2005. exploiting the pi3k/akt pathway for cancer drug dis-
covery. nat. rev. drug discov. 4: 988–1004.
jin, s. 2006. autophagy, mitochondrial quality control, and on-
cogenesis. autophagy 2: 80–84.
jin, s. and white, e. 2007. role of autophagy in cancer: man-
agement of metabolic stress. autophagy 3: 28–31.
kallioniemi, a., kallioniemi, o.p., sudar, d., rutovitz, d.,
gray, j.w., waldman, f., and pinkel, d. 1992. comparative
genomic hybridization for molecular cytogenetic analysis of
solid tumors. science 258: 818–821.
kallioniemi, a., kallioniemi, o.p., piper, j., tanner, m., stokke,
t., chen, l., smith, h.s., pinkel, d., gray, j.w., and wald-
1380
genes & development
man, f.m. 1994. detection and mapping of amplified dna
sequences in breast cancer by comparative genomic hybrid-
ization. proc. natl. acad. sci. 91: 2156–2160.
kirkegaard, k., taylor, m.p., and jackson, w.t. 2004. cellular
autophagy: surrender, avoidance and subversion by micro-
organisms. nat. rev. microbiol. 2: 301–314.
klionsky, d.j. and emr, s.d. 2000. autophagy as a regulated
pathway of cellular degradation. science 290: 1717–1721.
klionsky, d.j., cregg, j.m., dunn jr., w.a., emr, s.d., sakai, y.,
sandoval, i.v., sibirny, a., subramani, s., thumm, m.,
veenhuis, m., et al. 2003. a unified nomenclature for yeast
autophagy-related genes. dev. cell 5: 539–545.
komatsu, m., waguri, s., ueno, t., iwata, j., murata, s., tanida,
i., ezaki, j., mizushima, n., ohsumi, y., uchiyama, y., et al.
2005. impairment of starvation-induced and constitutive au-
tophagy in atg7-deficient mice. j. cell biol. 169: 425–434.
komatsu, m., waguri, s., chiba, t., murata, s., iwata, j., tanida,
i., ueno, t., koike, m., uchiyama, y., kominami, e., et al.
2006. loss of autophagy in the central nervous system
causes neurodegeneration in mice. nature 441: 880–884.
kuma, a., hatano, m., matsui, m., yamamoto, a., nakaya, h.,
yoshimori, t., ohsumi, y., tokuhisa, t., and mizushima,
n. 2004. the role of autophagy during the early neonatal
starvation period. nature 432: 1032–1036.
levine, b. and klionsky, d.j. 2004. development by self-diges-
tion: molecular mechanisms and biological functions of au-
tophagy. dev. cell 6: 463–477.
lin, c.t., lyu, y.l., xiao, h., lin, w.h., and whang-peng, j.
2001. suppression of gene amplification and chromosomal
dna integration by the dna mismatch repair system.
nucleic acids res. 29: 3304–3310.
little, k.c. and chartrand, p. 2004. genomic dna is captured
and amplified during double-strand break (dsb) repair in hu-
man cells. oncogene 23: 4166–4172.
livingstone, l.r., white, a., sprouse, j., livanos, e., jacks, t.,
and tlsty, t.d. 1992. altered cell cycle arrest and gene am-
plification potential accompany loss of wild-type p53. cell
70: 923–935.
mizushima, n. 2005. the pleiotropic role of autophagy: from
protein metabolism to bactericide. cell death differ. 12
(suppl. 2): 1535–1541.
mizushima, n., yamamoto, a., hatano, m., kobayashi, y., ka-
beya, y., suzuki, k., tokuhisa, t., ohsumi, y., and yoshi-
mori, t. 2001. dissection of autophagosome formation using
apg5-deficient mouse embryonic stem cells. j. cell biol.
152: 657–668.
mondello, c., guasconi, v., giulotto, e., and nuzzo, f. 2002.
␥-ray and hydrogen peroxide induction of gene amplifica-
tion in hamster cells deficient in dna double strand break
repair. dna repair (amst.) 1: 483–493.
narayanan, v., mieczkowski, p.a., kim, h.m., petes, t.d., and
lobachev, k.s. 2006. the pattern of gene amplification is
determined by the chromosomal location of hairpin-capped
breaks. cell 125: 1283–1296.
nelson, d.a., tan, t.t., rabson, a.b., anderson, d., degen-
hardt, k., and white, e. 2004. hypoxia and defective apo-
ptosis drive genomic instability and tumorigenesis. genes &
dev. 18: 2095–2107.
nigg, e.a. 2002. centrosome aberrations: cause or conse-
quence of cancer progression? nat. rev. cancer 2: 815–825.
pua, h.h., dzhagalov, i., chuck, m., mizushima, n., and he,
y.w. 2006. a critical role for the autophagy gene atg5 in t
cell survival and proliferation. j. exp. med. 204: 25–31.
qu, x., yu, j., bhagat, g., furuya, n., hibshoosh, h., troxel, a.,
rosen, j., eskelinen, e.l., mizushima, n., ohsumi, y., et al.
2003. promotion of tumorigenesis by heterozygous disrup-
downloaded from 
genesdev.cshlp.org
 on march 9, 2015 - published by 
cold spring harbor laboratory press
tion of the beclin 1 autophagy gene. j. clin. invest. 112:
1809–1820.
shen, d.w., fojo, a., chin, j.e., roninson, i.b., richert, n.,
pastan, i., and gottesman, m.m. 1986. human multidrug-
resistant cell lines: increased mdr1 expression can precede
gene amplification. science 232: 643–645.
shimizu, s., kanaseki, t., mizushima, n., mizuta, t., arakawa-
kobayashi, s., thompson, c.b., and tsujimoto, y. 2004.
role of bcl-2 family proteins in a non-apoptotic programmed
cell death dependent on autophagy genes. nat. cell biol. 6:
1221–1228.
snijders, a.m., nowak, n., segraves, r., blackwood, s., brown,
n., conroy, j., hamilton, g., hindle, a.k., huey, b., kimura,
k., et al. 2001. assembly of microarrays for genome-wide
measurement of dna copy number. nat. genet. 29: 263–
264.
symington, l.s. 2002. role of rad52 epistasis group genes in
homologous recombination and double-strand break repair.
microbiol. mol. biol. rev. 66: 630–670.
white, a.e., livanos, e.m., and tlsty, t.d. 1994. differential
disruption of genomic integrity and cell cycle regulation in
normal human fibroblasts by the hpv oncoproteins. genes
& dev. 8: 666–677.
yu, l., alva, a., su, h., dutt, p., freundt, e., welsh, s., baeh-
recke, e.h., and lenardo, m.j. 2004. regulation of an atg7–
beclin 1 program of autophagic cell death by caspase-8. sci-
ence 304: 1500–1502.
yue, z., jin, s., yang, c., levine, a.j., and heintz, n. 2003.
beclin 1, an autophagy gene essential for early embryonic
development, is a haploinsufficient tumor suppressor. proc.
natl. acad. sci. 100: 15077–15082.
autophagy limits genomic instability
genes & development
1381
erratum
genes & development 21: 1367–1381 (2007)
autophagy suppresses tumor progression by limiting chromosomal instability
robin mathew, sameera kongara, brian beaudoin, cristina m. karp, kevin bray, kurt degenhardt, guanghua chen,
shengkan jin, and eileen white
in the above-mentioned paper, the authors identified an inadvertent typographical error that they would like to
correct. in the discussion section, the sentence should read “this impaired survival in autophagy-deficient cells,
however, was overcome by increased mutation rate and chromosomal instability, resulting in accelerated
progression to aneuploidy, a hallmark of cancer, providing an explanation why the loss of this survival pathway can
function to promote tumorigenesis.” this correction does not affect the findings or conclusion of the study.
genes & development 21:1701 © 2007 by cold spring harbor laboratory press issn 0890-9369/07; www.genesdev.org
1701
downloaded from 
genesdev.cshlp.org
 on march 9, 2015 - published by 
cold spring harbor laboratory press
autophagy suppresses tumor progression by limiting chromosomal
instability
  
robin mathew, sameera kongara, brian beaudoin, et al. 
  
genes dev.
access the most recent version at doi:
 2007 21: 1367-1381 originally published online may 17, 2007
10.1101/gad.1545107
references
  
related content
email alerting
service
this article cites 45 articles, 14 of which can be accessed free at:
http://genesdev.cshlp.org/content/21/11/1367.full.html#ref-list-1
  
articles cited in:
http://genesdev.cshlp.org/content/21/11/1367.full.html#related-urls
  
erratum
genes dev. july 1, 2007 21: 1701
receive free email alerts when new articles cite this article - sign up in the box at the top
right corner of the article or
click here.
to subscribe to 
http://genesdev.cshlp.org/subscriptions
genes & development 
go to: 
copyright © 2007, cold spring harbor laboratory press