cellular and molecular neurobiology, vol. 26, nos. 4–6, july/august 2006 ( c(cid:1) 2006)
doi: 10.1007/s10571-006-9061-9
cellular and molecular mechanisms of parkinson’s
disease: neurotoxins, causative genes,
and inﬂammatory cytokines
toshi nagatsu1,2,3 and makoto sawada1
received january 26, 2006; accepted march 14, 2006; published online: july 6, 2006
summary
1. parkinson’s disease (pd) is considered to be an aging-related neurodegeneration
of catecholamine (ca) systems [typically a9 dopamine (da) neurons in the substantia
nigra and a6 noradrenaline (na) neurons in the locus coeruleus]. the main symptom is
movement disorder caused by a da deﬁciency at the nerve terminals of ﬁbers that project
from the substantia nigra to the striatum. most pd is sporadic (spd) without any hereditary
history. spd is speculated to be caused by some exogenous or endogenous substances that
are neurotoxic toward ca neurons, which toxicity leads to mitochondrial dysfunction and
subsequent oxidative stress resulting in the programmed cell death (apoptosis or autophagy)
of da neurons.
2. recent studies on the causative genes of rare familial pd (fpd) cases, such as alpha–
synuclein and parkin, suggest that dysfunction of the ubiquitin–proteasome system (ups)
and the resultant accumulation of misfolded proteins and endoplasmic reticulum stress may
cause the death of da neurons.
3. activated microglia, which accompany an inﬂammatory process, are present in
the nigro-striatum of the pd brain; and they produce protective or toxic substances,
such as cytokines, neurotrophins, and reactive oxygen or nitrogen species. these acti-
vated microglia may be neuroprotective at ﬁrst in the initial stage, and later may be-
come neurotoxic owing to toxic change to promote the progression toward the death of
ca neurons.
4. all of these accumulating evidences on spd and fpd points to a hypothesis
that multiple primary causes of pd may be ultimately linked to a ﬁnal common signal-
transduction pathway leading to programmed cell death, i.e., apoptosis or autophagy, of the
ca neurons.
key words: parkinson’s disease; dopamine; noradrenaline; neurotoxins; alpha-
synuclein; parkin; inﬂammation; microglia; cytokines; neurotrophins; apoptosis; auto-
phagy.
1department of brain life science, research institute of environmental medicine, nagoya university,
nagoya, aichi 464-8601, japan.
2department of pharmacology, school of medicine, fujita health university, toyoake, aichi 470-1192,
japan.
3 to whom correspondence should be addressed at department of brain life science, research
institute of environmental medicine, nagoya university, nagoya, aichi 464-8601, japan; e-mail:
tnagatsu@riem.nagoya-u.ac.jp.
781
0272-4340/06/0700-0781/1 c(cid:1) 2006 springer science+business media, inc.
782
nagatsu and sawada
introduction
parkinson’s disease (pd) is assumed to be a systemic neurodegenerative disease of
the catecholamine (ca) neurons. the neurons mainly affected are the a9 dopamine
(da) neurons in the substantia nigra and the a6 noradrenaline (na) neurons in
the locus coeruleus, both of which contain neuromelanin. pd is the second most
common aging-related neurodegenerative disease after alzheimer’s disease (ad).
the main symptom of pd is a movement disorder called parkinsonism, i.e., muscle
rigidity, akinesia, and resting tremor, symptoms which are caused by a da deﬁciency
in the striatum due to degeneration of the a9 da neurons in the substantia nigra. a
small percentage of pd is familial (fpd), but most pd is sporadic (spd) without any
hereditary history and is related to aging. a deﬁciency of da in the striatum in pd
patients was predicted by carlsson (1959) when he discovered da as a new neuro-
transmitter, and this prediction was conﬁrmed in postmortem brains by ehringer and
hornykiewicz (1960). da supplementation therapy by l-dopa was also predicted
by carlsson from the results of animal experiments (1959); and after many clinical
trials by several groups in the world, l-dopa is now established as the gold standard
of drug therapy for pd. spd and some cases of fpd are characterized by the presence
of intracytoplasmic eosinophilic inclusions called lewy bodies in the neurons and
glial cells of the affected individuals. lewy bodies consist mainly of alpha-synuclein
protein, which is encoded by the causative gene of fpd/park1 (familial parkin-
son’s disease 1), and are observed not only in pd but also in dementia with lewy
bodies (dlb), a disorder also called diffuse lewy body disease (dlbd; kosaka,
2000), and in other neurodegenerative diseases. thus, such neurodegenerative dis-
eases with lewy bodies are generally referred to synucleinopathies. lewy bodies are
frequently observed in the surviving da and na neurons of the substantia nigra
and locus coeruleus of the pd brain. braak et al. (2003) recently proposed, based on
anatomical investigation of lewy bodies, that the pathological process of spd starts
from the lower brain stem and spreads throughout the brain to the midbrain, limbic
brain, and cerebral cortex and that the main symptom of pd, i.e., movement disorder,
appears at the late stage when the nigro-striatal da neurons in the midbrain become
involved. in this theory, movement disorder parkinsonism in pd is speculated to be
a late symptom. lewy bodies are also observed not only in ca neurons but also in
non-ca neurons such as acetylcholine, amino acid, or peptide neurons in the central
and peripheral nervous systems, i.e., in neurons of the anterior olfactory nucleus,
dorsal nucleus of the vagus nerve, peripheral autonomic nervous system including
sympathetic ganglia, adrenal medulla, and parasympathetic ganglia, and intestinal
auerbach’s plexus. in relation to this wide distribution of lewy bodies in spd, var-
ious non-da symptoms, e.g., rem sleep behavior disorder (rbd) (abott, 2005),
olfaction disturbance, neurocircuitry abnormalities due to cardiac sympathetic den-
ervation (goldstein et al., 2005), or constipation, have been noticed as early signs of
spd before the appearance of parkinsonism.
the pathogenesis of spd is still enigmatic (foley and riederer, 1999), but free
radicals produced by mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress are thought to
play an important role (youdim and riederer, 1997; mizuno et al., 1998; schapira
et al., 1998). mitochondrial dysfunction in spd is supported by the ﬁndings on
cellular and molecular mechanisms of parkinson’s disease
783
complex i (nadh-ubiquinone reductase complex, one of the ﬁve enzyme com-
plexes of the inner mitochondrial membrane involved in oxidative phosphoryla-
tion) deﬁciency in the nigro-striatum of the postmortem brain from spd patients
and of complex i inhibition in the substantia nigra of animal pd models produced
by treatment with neurotoxins such as 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine
(mptp; langston et al., 1983) or the insecticide rotenone (betarbet et al., 2000). the
discovery of mptp causing pd in humans suggests the neurotoxin hypothesis, in
which mptp-like exogenous or endogenous neurotoxins acting together with pre-
sumed pd-susceptibility genes are assumed to be the cause of spd.
on the other hand, recent molecular genetical studies on mutations of the
causative genes of autosomal dominant or recessive fpd, especially alpha-synuclein
for autosomal dominant and lewy body-positive park1 (polymeropoulos et al.,
1997) and parkin for autosomal recessive and lewy body-negative juvenile park2
(kitada et al., 1998), have led to a new hypothesis, that fpd is caused by the accumu-
lation and/or aggregation of misfolded proteins due to dysfunction of the ubiquitin–
proteasome system (ups; table i). the discovery of the causative genes of fpd may
also give important clues for elucidating the signaling pathway of cell death in spd
(for reviews, see bonifati et al., 2004; feany, 2004; forman et al., 2004; cookson,
2005; krueger, 2004; selko, 2004; vila and przedborski, 2004; grandhi and wood,
2005; lozano and kalia, 2005; mizuno, 2006).
as another mechanism of neuronal death in pd, an inﬂammatory process in
the brain called neuroinﬂammation, which is accompanied by changes in the levels
of neuroprotective or neurotoxic cytokines and neurotrophins and the presence of
activated microglia, has recently gained much attention with respect to not only
pd, but also ad and other neurodegenerative diseases (for reviews, see mcgeer
and mcgeer, 1995; anglade et al., 1997; hirsch et al., 1999; mogi and nagatsu,
1999; nagatsu et al., 1999, 2000a,b; hartmann et al., 2000; jellinger, 2000; nagatsu,
2002a; hayley, 2005; herrera et al., 2005; nagatsu and sawada, 2005). the brain is
considered to be an immune privileged site, i.e., one free from immune reactions,
since it is protected by the blood–brain-barrier. however, accumulating ﬁndings have
revealed that immune responses may occur in the brain, especially due to activation
of the microglia, which cells are known to produce pro-inﬂammatory cytokines. this
inﬂammatory process is now thought to be fundamental to, if not at ﬁrst the initiator
of, the progression of pd pathogenesis. not only da neurons but also other non-da
neurons may be affected by this process, whose dysfunction may negatively impact
da and non-da pathways in the pd patients.
herein, we will review advances in our understanding of the cellular and molec-
ular pathogenesis of pd by separately focusing on these three groups of causative
factors, i.e., neurotoxins, causative genes, and inﬂammatory cytokines.
neurotoxic substances producing pd in humans
and animals
the cell death of a9 da neurons in spd may be caused by both genetic factors
and environmental factors. as to the latter, certain neurotoxins are speculated to
784
nagatsu and sawada
cellular and molecular mechanisms of parkinson’s disease
785
cause spd. this neurotoxin hypothesis of pd started in the 1980s from the discovery
of mptp, which produces pd in humans (davis et al., 1979; langston et al., 1983).
since then, environmental or endogenous neurotoxins similar to mptp in the brain
and/or cerebrospinal ﬂuid (csf) of pd patients have been investigated, and two
groups of amine-related compounds, i.e., isoquinolines and beta-carbolines, have
been suggested as candidates of such neurotoxins (for review, see nagatsu, 1997;
nagatsu, 2002b).
mptp, an analogue of meperidine (a synthetic heroin) is a highly lipophilic
precursor neurotoxin. after its systemic administration, it rapidly crosses the blood–
brain barrier to enter the brain. once in the brain, mptp, which is a proneurotoxin,
is metabolized to n-methyl-4-pheny-2,3-dihydropyridinium (mpdp+ ) by the en-
zyme monoamine oxidase b (mao b), which is localized in the outer membrane of
mitochondria within non-da cells such as glial cells and serotonin neurons. mpdp+
is then probably spontaneously oxidized to 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (mpp+ ),
the active neurotoxin. mpp+ is taken up across the cell membrane to enter into the
a9 nigro-striatal da neurons via da transporters, which are mostly localized at the
nerve terminals in the striatum. mpp+ then passes from the cytoplasm of these neu-
rons into synaptic vesicles by the action of vesicular monoamine transporter type
2 (vmat2). mpp+ also accumulates within the inner mitochondrial membrane,
where it inhibits complex i; interrupts electron transport; releases reactive oxygen
species (ros); and depletes atp. inhibition of the mitochondrial complex i also
results in the opening of mitochondrial permeability transition pores, allowing the
release of cytochrome c, which may trigger the signal transduction pathway culmi-
nating in apoptotic cell death. as a consequence of these actions, mpp+ decreases
the da level in the striatum, resulting in the appearance of pd-like symptoms.
mptp produces cell death speciﬁcally in a9 nigro-striatal da neurons. selegiline
(l-deprenyl), which is a speciﬁc inhibitor of mao b, completely blocks the neu-
rotoxicity of mptp by preventing the conversion of mptp to mpp+ in glial cells.
this may suggest that mao b allele activity could play an important genetic com-
ponent of spd. humans and monkeys are the most susceptible to mptp, but mice
and other non-primate animals also produce parkinsonism-like movement disorder
in response to mptp. in mptp-induced animal models of pd, typical cytoplas-
mic inclusions such as the lewy bodies found in spd are not observed. however,
chronic infusion of mice with mptp via an osmotic minipump caused the appearance
of alpha-synuclein- and ubiquitin-positive aggregates that looked like lewy bodies
(fornai et al., 2005).
as a group of mptp-like neurotoxins, the following isoquinolines have been
identiﬁed by gas chromatography–mass spectrometric analysis of postmortem brain
specimens and/or csf from pd patients and normal controls: tetrahydroiso-
quinoline (tiq), 1-methyl(me)-tiq, 2-me-tiq, n-me-6,7-(oh)2-tiq (n-me-
norsalsolinol), r-1,n-(me)2-6,7-(oh)2-tiq (r-n-me-salsolinol), 1-phenyl-tiq,
n-me-1-phenyl-tiq, and 1-benzyl-tiq (kajita et al., 2002; kotake et al., 1995;
moser and koempf, 1992; naoi et al., 1996; niwa et al., 1987; ohta et al., 1987).
tiqs are also found in various foods in small concentrations. exogenously ad-
ministered tiq easily crosses the blood–brain barrier and passes into the brain,
although tiqs are metabolized in the liver to 4-oh-tiqs by the action of
786
nagatsu and sawada
debrisoquine hydroxylase (p-450 cyp2d6). on the other hand, tiqs in the
brain are also speculated to be synthesized from endogenous amines such as
phenylethylamine or da by various enzymes. however, the synthetic pathway and
the enzymes for the biosynthesis of tiqs (versus beta-carbolines described be-
low which arise from tryptophan metabolism) have not yet determined. among
these tiqs in the brain, 2-me-tiq (fukuda, 1994), r-n-me-salsolinol (naoi et al.,
1996), n-me-norsalsolinol (moser and koempf, 1992), and 1-bn-tiq (kotake
et al., 1995) have gained much attention as neurotoxins that probably cause pd.
r-n-me-salsolinol, after its stereotaxic injection into the striatum of rats, induces
behavioral changes similar to those seen in pd and is metabolized to 1,n-(me)2-6,7-
(oh)2-isoquinolinium in the substantia nigra, similar to the mptp/mpp+ conver-
sion (naoi et al., 1996). among tiqs, 1-me-tiq is unique in that its concentration
is not increased but actually decreased in the striatum of pd patients and that it
prevented pd-like behavior abnormalities produced by mptp, tiq, and 1-bn-tiq
(tasaki et al., 1991).
beta-carbolines have structures similar to those of mptp/mpp+ , and may
be synthesized in vivo from tryptophan via tryptamine (collins and neafsey,
2000; matsubara, 2000). like mptp, beta-carbolines may be precursor neuro-
toxins that are n-methylated and oxidized by mao b to form, in their case,
beta-carbolinium ions, which may trigger apoptotic neuronal death and pd symp-
toms. norharman, harman, 2-me-norharmanium, and 2,9-(me)2-norharmanium
were found in the human brain and/or the csf. a neurotoxic 2,9-dimethylated
beta-carbolinium ion (2,9-(me)2- norharmanium) was found in half of the pd,
but not at all
in non-pd, patients examined (matsubara et al., 1995; kuhn
et al., 1996). these results suggest that beta-carbolinium compounds as well
as isoquinolinium compounds may also be candidate neurotoxins that produce
pd.
endogenous isoquinolines and beta-carbolines in the brain, as in the case
of mptp, are speculated to be ﬁrst n-methylated and then oxidized by mao
to the corresponding isoquinolinium ions or beta-carbolinium ions in glial cells.
the mechanisms of the da cell death caused by pd-producing neurotoxins,
i.e., mptp/mpp+ , isoquinoline/isoquinolinium, or beta-carboline/beta-carbolinium,
may be similar, acting to inhibit mitochondrial complex i, to induce ros for-
mation, and atp depletion, and ﬁnally to cause apoptotic cell death of da
neurons.
rotenone is a naturally occurring, lipophilic compound isolated from roots of
certain plants (derris species), and is used as the main component of many insec-
ticides. rotenone is not structurally related to amines, but is a speciﬁc inhibitor of
mitochondrial complex i. betarbet et al. (2000) reported that in lewis rats, chronic,
systemic inhibition of complex i by rotenone caused highly selective degeneration
of the a9 nigro-striatal da neurons with behavioral pd symptoms of hypokinesia
and rigidity. important morphological ﬁndings in these rotenone-treated rats were
that the nigro-striatal da neurons had accumulated ﬁbrillar cytoplasmic inclusions
containing ubiquitin and alpha-synuclein, similar to the lewy bodies seen in hu-
man spd. it was reported that the primary mechanism underlying the toxic effect
generation that causes damage to
of rotenone was a signiﬁcant increase in o2
cellular and molecular mechanisms of parkinson’s disease
787
mitochondrial complexes i and ii, presumably at the level of the 4fe–4s clusters
(panov et al., 2005).
all the properties of the afore-mentioned neurotoxins indicate that inhibi-
tion of complex i, resulting in ros formation, oxidative stress, and atp deple-
tion in da neurons may trigger the pathway of apoptotic cell death in these
cells. in agreement with this neurotoxin-based hypothesis, a selective defect in
complex i of the mitochondria in the nigro-striatal da neurons from the post-
mortem brain of spd patients was reported by several laboratories (youdim and
riederer, 1997; mizuno et al., 1998; shapira et al., 1998). however, it should
be noted that the development of pd has been conﬁrmed in humans only in
the case of mptp, a synthetic neurotoxin. that is, the toxicity of the afore-
mentioned endogenously identiﬁed neurotoxin candidates has been proved only in
animals.
6-hydroxydopamine (6-ohda) is a neurotoxin speciﬁc for da neurons in vitro
and in vivo (kostrzewa and jacobowitz, 1974). it is a very unstable compound and is
easily oxidized to produce ros, which may kill da neurons via apoptosis. although
6-ohda is formed from da in vitro, it is believed not to be formed in vivo. 6-
ohda does not cross the blood–brain barrier. thus, it is widely used to produce
hemiparkinsonian animal models by stereotaxic injection of it directly into the nigro-
striatal region.
since da (or na) is easily oxidized to form da quinones and other reac-
tive oxygen species, toxic metabolites of da such as da quinones (in the case
of na, na quinones), which are intermediates of neuromelanin biosynthesis,
or 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetaldehyde (dopal;
in the case of noradrenaline,
3,4-dihydroxyphenylethyleneglycolaldehyde, dopegal) formed by mao are
postulated to play a role as endogenous neurotoxin candidates in pd (eisenhofer
et al, 2002). da quinones may be formed either non-enzymatically or by the action
of tyrosinase. tyrosinase has been implicated in da quinone and neuromelanin
formation in the brain. however, we did not detect tyrosinase protein in the a9
nigral da neurons in the human brain by using antibodies against human tyrosinase
(ikemoto et al., 1998). dopal was identiﬁed in the pd brain, but not in the normal
brain, by gas chromatography–mass spectrometry (mattammal et al., 1993), and was
suggested to be toxic for da neurons in vitro (mattammal et al., 1995). however,
da depletion in da-deﬁcient mice did not protect against acute mptp toxicity
in vivo, suggesting that da does not contribute to this toxicity in vivo (hasbani et al.,
2005).
since iron exists in a high concentration in the basal ganglia and interacts with
neuromelanin and da, it is suggested to play a role in the formation of ros and in
the initiation of neurodegeneration of da neurons by oxidative stress (mochizuki
et al., 1993; gerlach et al., 1994).
all the effects of exogenous or endogenous neurotoxin candidates suggest that
mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress are important for the pathogenesis
of spd. inhibition of complex i results in enhanced production of ros, which in turn
inhibits complex i. thus, the vicious cycle resulting from even partial inhibition of
complex i in da neurons may lead to excessive stress and an atp deﬁcit that ends
in cell death (tretter et al., 2004).
788
nagatsu and sawada
causative genes of familial pd (park)
a small percentage (approximately 5%) of pd cases are familial with a heredi-
tary history (fpd; table i). several causative genes of fpd, which mutations produce
parkinsonism, and their chromosomal localization have recently been identiﬁed:
park1 (alpha-synuclein), park2 (parkin), park4 (triplication of alpha-
synuclein), park5 (uchl1), park6 (pink1), park7 (dj-1), and park8
(lrrk2) (for reviews, see chiba-falek and nussbaum, 2003; feany, 2004; forman
et al., 2004; selkoe, 2004; cookson, 2005; grandhi and wood, 2005; lozano and
kalia, 2005; mizuno, 2006).
in 1997, a causative mutation of fpd was ﬁrst identiﬁed in the park1 gene,
encoding the protein alpha-synuclein in autosomal dominant italian and greek
families (polimeropoulos et al., 1997). alpha-synuclein is a small (144 amino
acids), presynaptic protein and probably plays a role in signaling between neurons
(goedert, 2001). as a ﬁnding on the physiological role of alpha-synuclein, chandra
et al. (2005) reported that alpha-synuclein in conjunction with csp-alpha (cystein-
string protein alpha) has a powerful in vivo activity in protecting nerve terminals
against injury in mice. csp-alpha is a synaptic vesicle protein, essential for neural
survival, has a cochaperon function, and may prevent the accumulation of nonnative,
potentially toxic molecules during the continuous operation of a nerve terminal.
not only mutations in alpha-synuclein such as a single amino acid substitu-
tion a30p or a53p in park1, but also triplication of the wild-type alpha-synuclein
gene also causes autosomal dominant park4. alpha-synuclein is a major pro-
tein component of lewy bodies (spillantini et al., 1998), and thus may play an
important role in both fpd and spd. alpha-synuclein is a natively unfolded soluble
protein and has a central hydrophobic region and a high potency to aggregate to
form oligomers or protoﬁbrils and ultimately insoluble polymers or ﬁbrils under
certain conditions. the protoﬁbrillar intermediates are toxic in neurons (conway
et al., 2000). alpha-synuclein ﬁbrils cause mitochondrial complex i deﬁciency (sherer
et al., 2003) and oxidative stress (ischiropoulos and beckman, 2003). thus, alpha-
synuclein may elicit a pathogenetic mechanism similar to that acting in spd.
drosophila (fruit ﬂy) models based on overexpression of normal and mutant
forms of the alpha-synuclein gene show selective loss of da neurons and the forma-
tion of alpha-synuclein inclusions (feany and bender, 2000). experiments using this
model conﬁrmed that phosphorylation at the ser 129 residue is crucial to the toxicity
of alpha-synuclein and that mutations of this serine residue abolishes the toxicity.
the reduction in toxicity in this model is associated with increased inclusion body
formation, which suggests that inclusion bodies may protect neurons by reducing
the amount of diffusible toxic protein by sequestering it in inert bodies (chen and
feany, 2005). all these ﬁndings on alpha-synuclein suggest that the misfolding of
the protein is the key steps in mediating degeneration of da neurons in both fpd
and spd. alpha-synuclein transgenic mice develop neuronal mitochondrial degen-
eration, which also suggests a close correlation between alpha-synuclein and the
pathogenesis of spd (martin et al., 2006).
in park2 the gene encoding parkin protein, which was discovered in a japanese
family, is the most common mutant gene in fpd (kitada et al., 1998). the parkin
cellular and molecular mechanisms of parkinson’s disease
789
gene is very large, about 1.4 mb; and mutations of it are responsible for most of
the cases of autosomal recessive juvenile (young-onset) pd. the parkin protein is
an e3 ubiquitin ligase with two characteristic ring ﬁnger domains separated by
an ibr (in-between ring) domain (shimura et al., 2000). there is a notable absence
of lewy bodies in patients with the homozygous deletion of parkin, although these
bodies are present in patients with compound heterozygous parkin mutations. these
ﬁndings suggest that parkin plays a signiﬁcant role in lewy body formation and
that nigral cell loss and parkinsonism can occur in the absence of lewy bodies. the
identiﬁcation of mutations of the parkin gene in park2 suggests that dysfunction
of the ups due to loss of function has an important role in pd and that the parkin
gene may play a protective role. ubiquitin is added to proteins by the action of
e3 ubiquitin ligase to target them to the proteasome, a large multiprotein complex
that functions to degrade most ubiquitin-marked cellular proteins. parkin mutations
cause the accumulation of parkin substrates, which probably contributes to the death
of da neurons. many putative parkin substrates have been identiﬁed, including
synphilin-1, 22-kda o-glycosilated form of alpha-synuclein (alphasp22; shimura et
al., 2001), pael-r (parkin-associated endothelin receptor-like receptor; imai et al.,
2001), chip, cdc-rel1a, cyclin e, and synaptotagmin xi. overexpression of the
parkin substrate pael-r produces da cell death in vitro, which cells can be rescued
by parkin overexpression (yang et al., 2003).
parkin has been shown to be s-nitrosylated in vitro and in vivo in the mptp
mouse model of pd and in brains of patients with pd or lbd, and both neuron-
and microglia-derived no contributes to the s-nitrosylation of parkin in a biphasic
fashion after mptp intoxication. s-nitrosylation inhibits the e3 ubiquitin ligase
activity of parkin and thus its protective function (chung et al., 2004).
synphilin-1, a substrate of parkin, was shown to interact with alpha-synuclein
and to promote the formation of cytosolic inclusions. synphilin-1 also interacts with
e3 ubiquitin ligase siah (seven in absentia homologues)-1 and siah-2. siah
proteins ubiquitinate synphilin-1, promoting its degradation by ups, and may play
a role in inclusion formation, since siah immunoreactivity was demonstrated in
lewy bodies in pd patients (liani et al., 2004). mao inhibitor deprenyl (selegiline)
was reported to act for protection of da neurons by binding to glyceraldehyde-
3-phosphate dehydrogenase (gapdh; tatton et al., 2003). snyder (2005) recently
reported that an apoptotic stimulus turns on inducible no synthase with its product
no causing s-nitrosylation of gapdh in da neurons. this modiﬁcation allows
gapdh to bind to the e3 ubiquitin ligase siah, which transports gapdh to the
nucleus, leading to apoptotic cell death. they also showed that mao b inhibitor
deprenyl binds to siah protein, thereby preventing translocation of the gapdh–
siah complex from the cytoplasm to the nucleus and thus preventing apoptotic cell
death.
park5 is another autosomal dominant fpd. the gene encodes uchl1
(ubiquitin c-terminal hydrolase l1), which generates free ubiquitin and aids the
recycling of polyubiquitin chains back to monomeric ubiquitin (leroy et al., 1998).
uclh1 can also exert a ubiquitin ligase activity. the discovery of the uchl1
gene further supports the importance of the role of ups in the pathogenesis of
pd.
790
nagatsu and sawada
the ups may be important not only in fpd (park1, park2, park4, and
park5) but also in spd. postmortem brain tissues from spd patients show func-
tional deﬁcits in their 20s proteasome activity (chung et al., 2001). also, systemic
administration of inhibitors of the ups to rodents produces selective nigral cell loss
and lewy body-like inclusions, which are accompanied by clinical signs of parkison-
ism (mcnaught et al., 2004).
park6 is another autosomal recessive fpd, and is caused by a mutation in a mi-
tochondrial protein kinase called pink1 [pten (phosphatase and tensin romolog
deleted on chromosome ten)-induced kinase-1; valente et al., 2004)]. pink1 is the
ﬁrst nucleus-encoded mitochondrial protein to be implicated in the pathogenesis of
fpd. the pink1 gene encodes a serine/threonine protein kinase with signiﬁcant ho-
mology to the calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase. neuroblastoma cells
transiently transfected with either wild-type or mutant pink1 do not show any de-
tectable alterations in viability. in contrast, when these cells are challenged with a
proteasome inhibitor, mg132, overexpression of the wild-type pink1 mitigates cell
death; whereas, overexpression of mutant pink1 neither attenuates nor enhances
mg132-mediated cytotoxicity (valente et al., 2004). these results suggest that the
loss of pink1 function renders da neurons more vulnerable to injury. transient
knockdown of pink1 renders cells susceptible to apoptosis on exposure to taxol
(mackeigan et al., 2005). this neuroprotective function and the mitochondrial lo-
calization of pink1 suggest its probable important role in mitochondria also in
spd.
dj-1 is the causative gene of autosomal recessive early-onset park7
(bonifati et al., 2003). dj-1 is a homodimeric and multifunctional protein, ubiq-
uitously expressed in human tissues; and it plays essential roles in tissues with
higher-order biological functions such as the testis and brain. dj-1 is related
to male fertility, and its level in sperm is decreased in response to exposure to sperm
toxicants. dj-1 was discovered as a novel mitogen-dependent oncogene product in-
volved in a ras-related signal transduction pathway (nagakubo et al., 1997). dj-1 is
up-regulated after oxidative stress and may play a role as an antioxidant protein and
a sensor for oxidative stress. the crystal structure of dj-1 indicates that the protein
is structurally similar to a cysteine protease and may induce conformational changes
to acquire its catalytic activity in response to oxidative stress (honbou et al., 2003).
the function of dj-1 as an anti-oxidant protein again suggests its pathogenetic role
also in spd.
the gene for the lrrk2 (leucine-rich repeat kinase 2) was identiﬁed as
the park8 locus (paisan-ruiz et al., 2004; zimprich et al., 2004). mutations in
lrrk2 cause autosomal dominant pd with a broad spectrum of neuropatholog-
ical features, such as neuronal loss in the substantia nigra either in the absence
or in the widespread presence of lewy bodies or in the presence of neuroﬁb-
rillary tangles. the affected families originated from italy, portugal, and brazil,
indicating the presence of this mutation in different populations. the associated
phenotype is broad, including early and late disease onset (di fonzo et al., 2005).
the lrrk2 gene encodes a 286-kda protein that is a member of a novel fam-
ily of protein kinases called “dardarin” (meaning “tremor” in the basque region,
cellular and molecular mechanisms of parkinson’s disease
791
from where some of the affected patients came). dardarin contains leucine-rich
repeats and a ras/small gtpase superfamily domain, a tyrosine kinase-like do-
main, and the wd40 domains with sequence similarity to both tyrosine and ser-
ine/threonine kinases (shen, 2004). the presence of these novel domains in dardarin
suggests a unique and new function for this kinase in the survival of nigral da
neurons.
mutations in nr4a2 have also been found to be signiﬁcantly associated with
fpd (le et al., 2003). the nr4a2 gene (also called nurr1; i.e., nuclear receptor-
related 1) encodes a transcription factor that belongs to the steroid/thyroid hormone
receptor superfamily. alternative splicing and selective use of transcription initiation
sites control the expression of the human nurr1 gene (ichinose et al., 1999a,b).
interestingly, nurr1 is essential for the differentiation of the nigral da neurons and
is closely related to the expression and function of the da system. the nurr1 gene
activates expression of tyrosine hydroxylase (th; iwawaki et al., 2000), and also
enhances transcription of the da transporter (sacchetti et al., 2001). nr4a2 (+/− )
mice have a parkinsonian-like phenotype and are more susceptible than the wild
type to mptp (warbt et al., 2003). although the mechanism is not yet clear, nr4a2
is thought to be a susceptibility gene for spd.
da deﬁciency due to mutations of the genes of the enzymes involved in
da biosynthesis, i.e., da-synthesizing-enzyme th or its cofactor tetrahydrobiopt
erin (bh4)-synthesizing enzyme gtp cyclohydrolase i (gch), causes dopa-
responsive dystonia, parkinsonism in infancy or progressive infantile encephalopa-
thy with l-dopa-nonresponsive dystonia, depending upon the degree of da
deﬁciency (hoffmann et al., 2003; segawa et al., 2003; kobayashi and nagatsu,
2005). autosomal dominant gch deﬁciency, which was ﬁrst described by segawa
and thus called segawa’s disease, is a dopa-responsive dystonia caused by a
partial decrease of the activity of gch due to a mutation of one of its alle-
les (ichinose et al., 1994, 1995, 1999; nagatsu and ichinose, 1999; segawa et al.,
2003). segawa’s disease is a partial da deﬁciency without any da cell death
and the symptom is completely controllable by l-dopa administration. in con-
trast, park2 or autosomal recessive juvenile pd is initially similar to dopa-
responsive dystonia but progresses to parkinsonism, and is accompanied by da cell
death.
fpds indicate the importance of the dysfunction of ups and protein misfolding
in the pathogenesis of pd. overexpression of alpha-synuclein in mice and rats leads
to the development of mitochondrial degeneration and produces da cell death
similarly as in spd (yamada et al., 2004; martin et al., 2006). on the other hand,
mitochondrial dysfunction in spd also causes the dysfunction of ups due to atp
deﬁciency. the above genes involved in fpd may be susceptibility genes for spd.
it has been reported that da covalen1tly modiﬁes and functionally inactivates
parkin, suggesting a vulnerability of parkin to modiﬁcation by da and a mechanism
for the progressive loss of the neuroprotective parkin function in da neurons
during aging and spd (lavoie et al., 2005). thus, fpd and spd are different in
their primary causes, but may ultimately produce nigral da cell death by a ﬁnal
common pathway.
792
nagatsu and sawada
changes in cytokines produced by activated
microglia during the neuroinflammatory
process in pd
elevated pro-inﬂammatory cytokine expression in the presence of activated
microglia in the nigro-striatal region in spd
we and others have reported increases and decreases in the levels of pro-
inﬂammatory cytokines and neurotrophins, along with the appearance of activated
microglia, in the brain of spd patients, thus suggesting the presence of an inﬂam-
matory process (mcgeer and mcgeer, 1995; anglade et al., 1997; hirsch et al.,
1999; mogi and nagatsu, 1999; nagatsu et al., 1999; jellinger, 2000; hartmann
et al., 2000; nagatsu et al., 2000a,b; nagatsu, 2002a; hayley, 2005; herrera et al.,
2005; nagatsu and sawada, 2005). based on the results of enzyme-linked immuno-
solvent assay (elisas; for a review, see nagatsu, 2002a), we reported the changes
in the levels of the following cytokines and neurotrophins in the postmortem brain
(striatum) and/or ventricular or lumbar cerebrospinal ﬂuid (csf) in spd patients as
compared with their normal levels: (1) increased levels of tnf-alpha (mogi et al.,
1994a), il-1beta, il-6 (mogi et al., 1994b), il-2, il-4, egf, tgf-alpha, tgf-beta1,
tgf-beta2, bcl-2 (mogi et al., 1996), soluble fas, tnf r1 (p55), caspase 1, and
caspase 3 (mogi et al., 2000); and (2) decreased levels of neurotrophins bdnt and
ngf. these data on changes in the levels of cytokines in human pd brains were
also supported by the results obtained from animal models of pd. for example,
mptp-treated mice show an increased level of il-1beta and a decreased level of
ngf speciﬁcally in their striatum (mogi et al., 1998). as another model of pd, in
hemiparkinsonian rats produced by injecting 6-ohda into one side of the ven-
trotegmental bundle without or with l-dopa treatment, the levels of tnf-alpha
were signiﬁcantly increased only in the substantia nigra and striatum of the injected
side. l-dopa administration did not produce any signiﬁcant changes in tnf-alpha
levels in either 6-ohda-treated or control side of any of the brains (mogi and
nagatsu, 1999). these results agree with the changes seen in the tnf-alpha levels
in the striatum and lumbar csf in pd patients and also suggest that the increased
cytokine levels may not be due to the secondary effects of l-dopa therapy in pd
patients.
the increased levels of pro-inﬂammatory cytokines such as tnf-alpha, il-6,
and il-1beta and the decreased levels of neurotrophins such as bdnf and ngf,
which changes are known to trigger the process of apoptosis, strongly suggest a pro-
apoptotic environment in the striatum in pd. in fact, the levels of apoptosis-related
factors such as bcl-2 (mogi et al., 1996), soluble fas, tnf r1 (p55), caspase 1 (il-
1-beta converting enzyme), and caspase 3 are increased in the pd brain (mogi et al.,
2000). fas antigen and 2 tnf receptors, p55 and p75, are implicated in triggering
cell death upon stimulation by their natural ligands, i.e., tnf-alpha and fas ligands
(nagata and goldstein, 1995). since tnf r1 and caspases 1 and 3 have been im-
plicated as mediators of apoptotic cell death (kumar, 1995), their increased levels
support the presence of pro-apoptotic environment in the striatum in the pd brain.
the increased levels of bcl-2 (mogi et al., 1996) and sfas, which are anti-apoptotic
cellular and molecular mechanisms of parkinson’s disease
793
factors, may suggest their compensatory production to cope with apoptosis. marshall
et al. (1997) also reported up-regulation of bcl-2 in the basal ganglia in pd patients.
we also found that the levels of two other factors trophic toward da neurons,
i.e., gdnf (glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor) and bfgf (basic fibroblast
growth factor) were not decreased, although their concentrations were high in the
striatum in control or pd brains. this is in contrast to the markedly reduced levels
of bdnf or ngf speciﬁcally in that region in pd. the unchanged level of gdnf
in pd could be due to compensatory production in glial cells, which occurs with
neither bdnf nor ngf. in agreement with our results obtained by elisa, boka
et al. (1994) found tnf-alpha immunoreactive glial cells in the substantia nigra in
the pd brain, and other workers also reported increased cytokine levels in de novo
pd without l-dopa treatment: il-1beta and il-6 in lumbar csf (blum-degan
et al., 1995) and tgf-beta1 and tgf-beta2 in ventricular csf (vawter et al., 1996).
activated caspase 3 was also detected immunohistochemically and was proposed to
be the ﬁnal effector in the apoptotic cell death of da neurons in pd (hartmann
et al., 2002).
pro-inﬂammatory cytokines in the pd brain are produced
from activated microglia
the origin of pro-inﬂammatory cytokines in the pd brain is speculated to be
activated microglia. mcgeer et al. (1988) were the ﬁrst to report an increase in
the number of major histocompatibility complex class ii antigen [human leukocyte
antigen-dr (hla-dr)]-positive reactive microglia in the substantia nigra in pd
patients. we also speculated that activated microglia are present in the pd brain
to produce pro-apoptotic cytokines and neuroinﬂammation, ultimately promoting
death of da neurons in the substantia nigra. imamura et al. (2003) proved that
increased amounts of cytokines are produced by activated microglia in the putamen
of spd patients. mogi et al. (1994a,b) had previously shown, by enzyme immunoassay,
increased levels of tnf-alpha and il-6 in the striatum in spd. imamura et al. (2003)
identiﬁed by western blot analysis tnf-alpha protein and il-6 protein, along with
mhc class ii (cr3/43) protein, in homogenates of the putamen from spd patients;
and they further proved by an immunoﬂuorescence technique the coexistence of
tnf-alpha and il-6 proteins in icam-i and lfa-1-positive mhc class ii-bearing
activated microglia in the putamen from spd patients. these results conﬁrmed that
tnf-alpha and il-6 proteins are produced from activated microglia in the putamen
in spd.
activated microglia may be initially non-toxic/neuroprotective and then
by a toxic change become neurotoxic to cause progression of pd
activated microglia are known to produce either neuroprotective or neurotoxic
factors. the question is whether these activated microglia are neuroprotective or
neurotoxic toward the nigro-striatal da neurons.
we aimed at elucidating the role of activated microglia in the postmortem brain
of spd at the cellular level. activated microglia have multiple roles: (1) mhc class
794
nagatsu and sawada
ii-positive ones act in antigen presentation; (2) activated microglia phagocytose
damaged cells; (3) they produce substances such as the pro-inﬂammatory cytokines
tnf-alpha and il-6, which are pleiotropic and act either as neurotoxins or as neu-
roprotective agents, as well as neurotoxic substances, i.e., ros, nitric oxide (reactive
nitrogen species, rns), and glutamate; and (4) they also produce neurotrophic sub-
stances such as the neurotrophin bdnf and cytokines that act neuroprotectively.
in the normal brain, many kp1-positive resting microglia, which are non-toxic,
are seen in the substantia nigra and putamen. in the pd ones, however, a large
number of mhc class ii-positive ramiﬁed, activated microglia are found in these
regions compared with their number in normal controls. furthermore, the number
of mhc class ii-positive microglia in the putamen in pd increases as the stage of pd
advances. in the early stages of pd, mhc class ii-positive microglia in the putamen
and substantia nigra are associated with intensively th-positive da neurites show-
ing no signs of degeneration. in the advanced stages, however, mhc class ii-positive
microglia in these areas are found with damaged th-positive neurons and neurites.
these results suggest that activated microglia in the substantia nigra and putamen
may be non-toxic/neuroprotective or neurotoxic, depending on the stage of pd.
imamura et al. (2003) observed that the number of mhc class ii-positive acti-
vated microglia was signiﬁcantly higher not only in the substantia nigra and putamen
but also in various other brain regions such as the hippocampus, transentorhinal cor-
tex, cingulate cortex, and temporal cortex in pd brains than in the control ones.
imamura et al. (2005) also observed activated microglia in the nigro-striatum and
hippocampus in dementia with lewy bodies (dlb), and compared them with those
in pd. neuronal degeneration in the putamen was observed in both pd and dlb,
whereas neuronal loss in the hippocampus was observed in dlb but not in pd
without dementia. in normal controls, neuronal loss, activated microglia, and alpha-
synyclein-positive cells were not observed in the hippocampus (ca2/3 region), and
neurons were strongly bdnf positive. in the hippocampus (ca2/3 region) in pd,
the number of mhc class ii-positive microglia was increased, which cells were
also positive for icam-i (cd54), lfa-1, tnf-alpha, and il-6. alpha-synuclein-
positive cells were also observed. bdnf-stained neurons were only slightly de-
creased in number in pd compared with those in controls. in the hippocampus
(ca2/3 region) in dlb, the numbers of mhc class ii (cr3/43)-positive microglia
and alpha-synuclein-positive microglia, and alpha-synuclein-positive neurons were
greater than those in pd, and the neurons were very weakly stained with anti-bdnf.
these immunohistochemical data on the hippocampus (ca 2/3 region) indicate that
the number of activated microglia increases in both pd and dlb and that the con-
tent of neurotrophic bdnf protein is markedly decreased in dlb but not in pd.
furthermore, in the hippocampus, mrna levels of il-6 and tnf-alpha were in-
creased in both pd and dlb compared with the control levels; whereas the mrna
level of bdnf was greatly decreased in dlb, as compared with that in pd or nor-
mal controls. these different changes in the levels of mrna and protein of bdnf,
il-6, or tnf-alpha in the hippocampus and putamen between pd and dlb suggest
that activated microglia in these brain regions in pd and dlb are different in their
properties and may secrete different kinds and different amounts of cytokines and
neurotrophins such as bdnf and il-6.
cellular and molecular mechanisms of parkinson’s disease
795
as other evidence supporting this concept of
the presence of non-
toxic/neuroprotective and neurotoxic microglia, we (sawada et al., 2006) separated
two subsets of microglia from normal mouse brain by cell sorting based on proﬁles
of intracellular ros production induced by phorbol myristate acetate (pma) stim-
ulation: one subset of microglia producing a large amount of ros and the other, just
a minute amount of ros. furthermore, we obtained two cell lines of microglia, ra2
cells and 6–3 cells, by spontaneous immortalization of mouse microglia in primary
cultures. the ra2 microglia cell line did not produce ros upon pma stimulation,
whereas the 6–3 one produced ros in large amounts in response to this stimu-
lant. when co-cultured with n18 neuronal cells, ra2 cells were neuroprotective,
whereas 6–3 cells were neurotoxic. furthermore, sawada and co-workers found in a
cell culture experiment a toxic change in activated microglia from neuroprotective
to neurotoxic, caused by transduction of the cells with a lenti virus vector carrying
hiv-1 nef cdna (vilhardt et al., 2002). it is speculated that a similar toxic change in
activated microglia may occur in vivo in the pd brain as the second step, one caused
by other factors such as invasion of serum, viruses, toxic substances, or inﬂammatory
cells in some of the neuroprotective microglia in a speciﬁc brain regions, i.e., the
nigro-striatum in pd. as a result of this toxic change, large amounts of cytotoxic
factors such as ros, no, and rns produced by nadph oxidase, myeloperoxi-
dase, cyclooxygenase 2 (cox 2), or nitric oxide synthase may promote the observed
neuronal loss. the presence of reactive microglia in the substantia nigra years after
mptp exposure was detected in experimental monkeys (mcgeer et al., 2003) and
in human patients (langston et al., 1999). these reactive microglia might have been
produced by a toxic change in response to the exposure to mptp. these results also
suggest that a variety of causative agents of spd, disappearing after having instituted
long-lasting inﬂammatory changes, might cause progression of the disease.
based on the results described earlier, sawada et al. (2006) recently proposed a
hypothesis of two-step activation of microglia in vivo in the pd brain. the observa-
tion on activated microglia associated with non-degenerating neurons and neurites
in various brain regions such as the hippocampus in the early stage of pd suggests
that microglia activated by the initiating factors of pd may be at ﬁrst non-toxic and
act for neuroprotection by producing neurotrophins, neurotrophic cytokines, and
antioxidant substances in the ﬁrst step. however, a toxic change in the activated
microglia may occur as the second step to promote progression of the disease.
contribution of julie axelrod to pd research
aside from his other numerous accomplishments, dr. julie axelrod has made
many great contributions also to pd research. one great contribution was his dis-
covery of the reuptake of neurotransmitter catecholamines into the pre-synaptic
nerve endings via membrane transporters and then from the cytoplasm to the synap-
tic vesicles via vesicular transporters (axelrod et al., 1959). this discovery pro-
vided a general principle for the termination of neurotransmission, and led to the
identiﬁcation of neurotransmitter transporters such as da transporter (dat) and
na transpoter (nat), and vesicular monoamine transporters (vmat), and to the
796
nagatsu and sawada
development of innovative drugs such as serotonin noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors
as anti-depression drugs and of new diagnostic methods such as molecular imaging by
pet (positron emission tomography) or spect (single photon emission computed
tomography) of synaptic function. another great contribution is his discovery of
catechol o-methyl transferase (comt; axelrod, 1957). inhibitors of comt are
of great importance to the l-dopa therapy of pd in combination with mao b
inhibitors such as deprenyl.
conclusions and future prospects
spd is thought to be caused by the combination of a susceptible genetic back-
ground and various environmental factors. the biochemical analysis of postmortem
brain from pd patients and neurotoxin-induced animal models indicates mito-
chondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress to be important. on the other hand, the
causative genes of fpd indicate the accumulation of misfolded proteins due to ups
dysfunction to be important. it should be noted that both mitochondrial dysfunction
and ups dysfunction may be related to each other, and may trigger a common
signal transduction pathway to programmed cell death. there are 2 types of
programmed cell death, i.e., apoptosis and autophagy. alpha-synuclein is degraded
by both the ubiquitin–protesome pathway and the autophagy–lysosome pathway
(webb et al., 2003). much data on the pathogenesis of pd support the programmed
cell death mechanism by apoptosis. however, this still remains controversial. the
process of neuroinﬂammation may also be important, especially for the progression
of pd. sawada et al. (2006) has proposed a hypothesis of two-step activation of
microglia in the brain and their toxic change in pd patients. in order to conﬁrm
this hypothesis, the following points remain to be proved: (1) the ﬁrst and second
causative stimuli must be identiﬁed; (2) a toxic change should be conﬁrmed to occur
in vivo in the nigro-striatum in pd models. a stimulus such as mptp toxicity may
directly produce degeneration of da cells, and some signal from degenerating da
neurons may trigger activation of microglia, which may, due to the toxic change for
producing neurotoxic cytokines, promote cell death of da neurons, perpetuating a
vicious circle. it is also possible that in fpd damaged da neurons may send unknown
signals to microglia to activate them. thus, activated microglia producing neurotoxic
cytokines may promote the progression of the disease in both spd and fpd.
acknowledgments
toshi nagatsu dedicates this paper to the late dr. julie axelrod with great
admiration for him for his outstanding scientiﬁc achievements as nobel laureate
and for his extremely warm personality and humanitarian efforts. this work was
supported by grants-in-aid for scientiﬁc research from the ministry of labor and
welfare of japan (ms), from the ministry of education, culture, sports, science,
and technology of japan (ms), and from the japan health sciences foundation
(ms). we are thankful to all of our collaborators, especially drs. k. imamura, k.
cellular and molecular mechanisms of parkinson’s disease
797
ono, h. suzuki, y. hashizume, and m. mogi and to drs. p. riederer, y. mizuno,
t. kondo, and s. kuno for their collaboration in supplying us post mortem brain
samples from their brain banks.
references
abott, a. (2005). while you are sleeping. nature (news feature)437:1220–1222.
anglade, p., vyas, s., javoy-agid, f., ilerreto, m. t., michel, p. p., marquez, j., pouatt-prigent, a.,
ruberg, m., hirsch, c., and agid, y. (1997). apoptosis and autophagy in nigral neurons of patients
with parkinson’s disease. histol. histopathol. 12:25–31.
axelrod, j., weil-malherbe, h., and tomchick, r. (1959). the physiological distribution of 3h-epinephrine
and its metabolite epinephrine. j. pharm. exp. therap. 127:251–256.
axelrod, j. (1957). o-methylation of epinephrine and other catecholamines in vitro and in vivo. science:
126:400–401.
betarbet, r., sherer, t. b., mackenzie, g., garcia-osuna, m., panov, a. v., and greenmyre, j. t. (2000).
chronic systemic pesticide exposure reproduces features of parkinson’s disease. nat. neurobiol.
3:1301–1306.
blum-degan, d., mueller, t., kuhn, w., gerlach, m., przuntek, h., and riederer, p. (1995). interleukin 1-
beta and interleukin-6 are elevated in the cerebrospinal ﬂuid of alzheimer’s and de novo parkinson’s
disease. neurosci. lett. 202:17–20.
boka, g., anglade, p., wallach, d., javoy-azid, f., agid, y., and hirsch, e. c. (1994). immunocytochemical
analysis of tumor necrosis factor and its receptor in parkinson’s disease. neurosci. lett 172:151–
154.
bonifati, v., rizzu, p., van baren, m. j., schaap, o. j., breedveld, g. j., krieger, e., dekker, m. c. j.,
squitieri, f., ibanez, p., joosse, m., van dongen, j. w., vanacore, n., van swieten, j. c., brice, a.,
meco, g., van duijn, c. m., oostra, b. a., and heutink, p. (2003). mutations in the dj-1 gene
associated with autosomal recessive early-onset parkinsonism. science 299:256–259.
bonifati, v., oostra, b. a., and heutink, p. (2004). unraveling the pathogenesis of parkinson’s disease:
the contribution of monogenic forms. cell. mol. life sci. 61:1729–1750.
braak, h., deltredici, k., rub, u., devos, r. a. i., steur, e. n. h. j., and braak, e. (2003). staging of
brain pathology related to sporadic parkinson’s disease. neurobiol. aging 24:197–212.
carlsson, a. (1959). the occurrence, distribution and physiological role of dopamine in the nervous
system. `pharmacol. rev. 11:490–493.
chandra, s., gallardo, g., fernandez-chacon, r., schlueter, o. m., and suedhof, t. c. (2005). alpha-
synuclein cooperates with csp alpha in preventing neurodegeneration. cell 123:383–396.
chen, l., and feany, m. b. (2005). alpha-synuclein phosphorylation controls neurotoxicity and inclusion
formation in a drosophila model of parkinson’s disease. nat. neurosci. 8:657–663.
chiba-falek, o., and nussbaum, r. l. (2003). regulation of alpha-synuclein expression: implication for
parkinson’s disease. cold spring harbor sym. quantit. biol. lxviii:409–415.
chung, k. k., dawson, v. l., and dawson, t. m. (2001). the role of the ubiquitin-proteasomal pathway in
parkinson’s disease and other neurodegenerative disorders. trends neurosci. 24(suppl. 11):s7–s14.
chung, k. k., thomas, b., li, x., pletnikova, o., troncosa, j. c., marsh, l., dawson, v. l., and dawson,
t. m. (2004). s-nitrosylation of parkin regulates ubiquitination and compromises parkin’s protective
function. science 304:1328–1331.
collins, m. a., and neafsey, e. j. (2000). beta-carboline analogues of mpp+ as environmental neuro-
toxins. in storch, a., and collins, m. a. (eds.), neurotoxic factors in parkinson’s disease and related
disorders, kluwer academic publishing/plenum, new york, pp. 115–130.
conway, k. a., lee, s. j., rochet, j. c., ding, t. t., williamson, r. e., and lansbury, p. t., jr. (2000).
acceleration of oligomerization, not ﬁbrillization, is a shared property of both alpha-synuclein
mutations linked to early onset parkinson’s disease: implications for pathogenesis and therapy. proc.
natl. acad. sci. usa 97:571–576.
cookson, m. r. (2005). the biochemistry of parkinson’s disease. ann. rev. biochem. 74:29–74.
dawer, w., and przedborski, s. (2003) parkinson’s disease: mechanisms and models, neuron 39:889–
davis, g. c. b., williams, a. c., markey, s. p., ebert, m. h., caine, e. d., reichert, c. m., and kopin, i. j.
(1979). chronic parkinsonism secondary to intravenous injection of meperidine analogus. psychiatry
res. 1:249–254.
di fonzo, a., rohe, c. f., ferreira, j., chien, h. f., vacca, l., stocchi, f., guedes, l., fabrizio, e., manfredi,
m., vanacore, n., goldwurm, s., breedveld, g., sampaio, c., meco, g., barbosa, e., oostra, b. a.,
909.
798
nagatsu and sawada
and bonifati, v. italian parkinson genetics network (2005). a frequent lrrk2 gene mutation
associated with autosomal dominant parkinson’s disease. lancet 365:412–415.
ehringer, h., and hornykiewicz, o. (1960). verteilung von noradrenalin und dopamin (3-
hydroxytyramin) im gehirn des menschen und ihr verhalten bei erkarankungen des extrapyra-
midalen systems. klin. wschr. 38:1236–1239.
eisenhofer, g., lamensdorf, i., kirk, k. l., kawamura, m., and sato, s. (2002). oxidative deamination
of monoamines and biogenic aldehydes in neurodegenetration. in creveling, c. r. (ed.), role of
catechol quinone species in cellular toxicity, f.p. graham publishing, johnson city, pp. 147–167.
feany, m. b. (2004). new genetic insights into parkinson’s disease. new engl. j. med. 351:1937–1940.
feany, m. b., and bender, w. w. (2000). a drosophila model of parkinson’s disease. nature 404:394–398.
foley, p., and riederer, p. (1999). pathogenesis and preclinical course of parkinson’s disease. j. neural.
transm. suppl. 56:31–74.
forman, m. s., trojanowski, j. q., and lee, v. m.-y. (2004). neurodegenerative diseases: a decade of
discoveries paves the way for therapeutic breakthroughs. nature med. 10:1055–1063.
fornai, f., schlueter, o. m., lenzi, p., gesi, m., ruffoli, r., ferrucci, m., lazzeri, g., busceti, c. l.,
pontarelli, f., battaglia, g., pellegrini, a., nicoletti, f., ruggieri, s., paparelli, a., and suedhof,
t. c. (2005). parkinson-like syndrome induced by continuous mptp infusion: convergent roles of
the ubiquitin-proteasome system and alpha-synuclein. proc. natl. acad. sci. usa 102:3413–3418.
fukuda, t. (1994). 1-methyl-1,2,3,4-tetrahydroisoquinoline does dependently reduces the number of
tyrosine hydroxylase-immunoactive cells in the substantia nigra and locus ceruleus of c57bl/6j
mice. brain res. 639:325–328.
gerlach, m., ben-shachar, d., riederer, p., and youdim, m. b. h. (1994). altered brain metabolism of
iron as a cause of neurodegenerative diseases? j. neurochem. 63:793–807.
goedert, m. (2001). alpha-synuclein and neurodegenerative diseases. nat. rev. neurosci. 2:492–501.
goldstein, d. s., eldadah, b. a., holmes, c., pechnik, s., moak, j., saleem, a., and sharabi, y. (2005).
neurocirculatory abnormalities in parkinson disease with orthostatic hypotention: independence
from levodopa treatment. hypertension 46:1333–1339.
grandhi, s., and wood, n. w. (2005). molecular pathogenesis of parkinson’s disease. human mol. genet.
14:2749–2755.
hartmann, a., hunot, s., michel, p. p., muriel, m. p., vyas, s., faucheux, b. a., mouatt-prignet, a.,
turmel, h., srinivasan, a., ruberg, m., evan, g. i., agid, y., and hirsch, e. c. (2000). caspase-
3: a vulnerable factor and a ﬁnal effector in the apoptotic cell death of dopaminergic neurons in
parkinson’s disease. proc. natl. acad. sci. usa 97:2875–2880.
hasbani, d. m., perez, f. a., palmiter, r. d., and o’malley, k. l. (2005). dopamine depletion does
not protect against acute 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine toxicity in vivo. j. neurosci.
25:9428–9433.
hayley, s. (2005). multiple mechanisms of cytokine activation in neurodegenerative and psychiatric states:
neurochemical and molecular substrates. curr. pharmac design 11:947–962.
hirsch, e. c., hunot, s., faucheux, b. a., agid, y., mizuno, y., mochizuki, h., tatton, w. g., tatton, n.,
and olanow, w. c. (1999). dopaminergic neurons degenerate by apoptosis in parkinson’s disease.
mov. disord. 14:383–385.
hoffmann, g. f., assmann, b., braeutigam, c., dionisi-vici, c., haeussler, m., and deklerk, j. b. c.,
neumann, m., steenbergen-spanjers, g. c. h., strassburg, m.-h., and wevers, r. a. (2003). tyrosine
hydroxylase deﬁciency causes progressive encephalopathy and dopa-non-responsive dystonia. ann.
neurol. 54(suppl. 6):s56–s65.
honbou, k., suzuki, n. n., horiuchi, m., niki, t., taira, t., ariga, h., and inagaki, f. (2003). the
crystal structure of dj-1, a protein related to male fertility and`parkinson’s disease. j. biol. chem.
278:31380–31384.
ichinose, h., ohye, t., takahashi, e., seki, n., hori, t., segawa, m., nomura, y., endo, k., tanaka, h.,
tsuji, s., fujita, k., and nagatsu, t. (1994). hereditary progressive dystonia with marked diurnal
ﬂuctuation caused by mutations in the gtp cyclohydolase i gene. nature genet. 8:236–242.
ichinose, h., ohye, t., matsuda, y., hori, t., blau, n., burlina, a., rouse, b., matalon, r., fujita, k., and
nagatsu, t. (1995). characterization of mouse and human gtp cyclohydrolase i genes. mutations in
patients with gtp cyclohydrolase i deﬁciency. j. biol. chem. 270:10062–10071.
ichinose, h., suzuki, t., inagaki, h., ohye, t., and nagatsu, t. (1999). molecular genetics of dopa-
responsive dystonia. biol. chem. 380:1355–1364.
ichinose, h., ohye, t., suzuki, t., sumi-ichinose, c., nomura, t., hagino, y., and nagatsu, t. (1999).
molecular cloning of the human nurr1 gene: characterization of the human gene and cdna. gene
230:233–239.
ikemoto, k., nagatsu, i., ito, s., king, r., nishimura, a., and nagatsu, t. (1998). does tyrosinase exist in
neuromelanin-pigmented neurons in the human substantia nigra? neurosci. lett. 253:198–200.
cellular and molecular mechanisms of parkinson’s disease
799
imai, y., soda, m., inoue, h., hattori, n., mizuno, y., and takahashi, r. (2001). an unfolded putative
transmembrane polypeptide, which can lead to endoplasmic reticulum stress, is a substrate of parkin.
cell 105:891–902.
imamura, k., hishikawa, n., sawada, m., nagatsu, t., yosida, m., and hashizume, y. (2003). distribution
of major histocompatibility complex ii-positive microglia and cytokine proﬁle of parkinson’s disease
brains. acta neuropathol. 106:518–526.
imamura, k., hishikawa, n., ono, k., suzuki, h., sawasa, m., nagatsu, t., yoshida, m., and
hashizume, y. (2005). cytokine production of activated microglia and decrease on neurotrophic
factors of neurons in the hippocampus of lewy body disease brain. acta neuropathol. 109:141–
150.
ischiropoulos, h., and beckman, j. s. (2003). oxidative stress and nitration in neurodegeneration: cause,
effect, or association? j. clin. invest. 111:163–169.
iwawaki, t., kohno, k., and kobayashi, k. (2000). identiﬁcation of a potential nurr1 response element
that activates the tyrosine hydroxylase gene promoter in cultured cells. biochem. biophys. res.
cpmmun. 274:590–595.
kajita, m., niwa, t., and nagatsu, t. (2002). tetrahydroisoquinolines (tiq) and neurodegeneration. in
creveling, c. r. (ed.), role of quinone species in cellular toxicity, f. p. graham publishing, johnson
city, tn, pp. 169–190.
kitada, t., asakawa, s., hattori, n., matsumine, h., yamamura, y., minoshima, s., yokochi, m., mizuno,
y., and shimizu, n. (1998). mutations in the parkin gene cause autosomal recessive juvenile parkin-
sonism. nature 392:605–608.
kobayashi, k., and nagatsu, t. (2005). molecular genetics of tyrosine 3-monooxygenase and inherited
diseases. biochem. biophy. res. commun. 338:267–270.
kosaka, k. (2000). lewy body disease. neuropathol. suppl. 20:73–78.
kostrzewa, r. m., and jacobowitz, d. m. (1974). pharmacological actions of 6-hydroxydopamine. pharm.
rev. 26:199–288.
kotake, y., tasaki, y., makino, s., hirobe, m., and ohta, s. (1995). 1-benzyl-1,2,3,4-tetrahydroisoquinoline
as a parkinsonism-inducing agent: a novel endogenous amine in mouse brain and parkinsonian csf.
j. neurochem. 65:2633–2638.
krueger, r. (2004). genes in familial parkinsonism and their role in sporadic parkinson’s disease. j.
neurol. 251(supl. 6):vi/2–vi/6.
kuhn, w., mueller, th., grosse, h., and rommelspacher, h. (1996). elevated levels of harman and
norharman in cerebrospinal ﬂuid of parkinsonian patients. j. neural. transm. 103:1435–1440.
kumar, s. (1995). ice-like proteases in apoptosis. trends biochem. sci. 20:198–202.
langston, j. w., ballard, p., tetrud, j. w., and irwin, i. (1983). chronic parkinsonism in humans due to a
product of meperidine-analog synthesis. science 219:979–980.
lavoie, m. j., ostaszewski, b. l., weihofen, a., schlossmacher, m. g., and selkoe, d. j. (2005). dopamine
covalently modiﬁes and functionally inactivates parkin. nat. med. 11:1214–1221.
leroy, e., boyer, r., auburger, g., leube, b., ulm, g., mezey, e., harta, g., brownstein, m. j.,
jonnalagada, s., chernova, t., dehejia, a., lavedan, c., gasser, t., steinbach, p. j., wilkinson,
k. d., and polymeropoulos, m. h. (1998). the ubiquitin pathway in parkinson’s disease. nature
395:451–452.
le, w., xu, p., jankovic, j., jiang, h., appel, s. h., smith, r. g., and vassilatis, k. (2003). mutations in
nr4a2 associated with familial parkinson’s disease. nat. genet. 33:85–89.
liani, e., eyal, a., avraham, e., shemer, r., szargel, r., berg, d., bornemann, a., riess, o., ross,
c. a., rott, r., and engelender, s. (2004). ubiquitination of synphilin-1 and alpha-synyclein by
siah and its presence in cellular inclusions and lewy bodies imply a role in parkinson’s disease.
proc. nat. acad. sci. usa 101:5500–5505.
lozano, a. m., and kalia, s. k. (2005). new movement in parkinson’s. scientiﬁc american, pp. 68–75.
mackeigan, j. p., murphy, l. o., and blenis, j. (2005). sensitized rnai screen of human kinases and
phosphatases identiﬁes new regulators of apoptosis and chemoresistance. nature cell biol. 7:591–
600.
martin, l. j., pan, y., price, a. c., sterling, w., copeland, n. g., jenkins, n. a., price, d. l., and lee,
m. k. (2006). parkinson’s disease alpha-synuclein transgenic mice develop neuronal mitochondrial
degeneration and cell death. j. neurosci. 26:41–50.
marshall, k. a., daniel, s. e., cairns, n., jenner, p., and halliwell, b. (1997). upregulation of the anti-
apoptotic protein bcl-2 may be an early event in neurodegeneration: studies on parkinson’s and
incidental lewy body disease. biochem. biophys. res. commun. 240:84–87.
matsubara, k. (2000). n-methyl-beta-carbolinium neurotoxins in parkinson’s disease. in storch, a.,
and collins, m. a. (eds.) neurotoxic factors in parkinson’s disease and related disorders, kluwer
academic publishing/plenum, new york, pp. 131–143.
800
nagatsu and sawada
matsubara, k., kobayashi, s., kobayashi, y., yamashita, k., koide, h., hatta, m, iwamoto, k., tanaka,
o., and kimura, k. (1995). beta-carbolinium cations, endogenous mpp+ analogs in the lumbar
cerebrospinal ﬂuid of parkinsonian patients. neurology 45:2240–2245.
mattammal, m. b., chung, h. d., and strong, r. (1993). conﬁrmation of a dopamine metabolite in
parkinsonian brain tissue by gas-chromatography-mass spectrometry. j. chromatogr. b 614:205–
212.
mattammal, m. b., haring, j. h., chung, h. d., raghu, g., and strong, r. (1995). an endogenous
dopaminergic neurotoxin: implication for parkinson’s disease. neurodegeneration 4:271–281.
mcgeer, p. l., itagaki, s., boyes, b. e., and mcgeer, e. g. (1988). reactive microglia are positive for
hla-dr in the substantia nigra of parkinson’s disease and alzheimer’s disease brain. neurology
38:1285–1291.
mcgeer, p. l., and mcgeer, e. g. (1995). the inﬂammatory response system of brain, implications for
therapy of alzheimer and other neurodegenerative diseases. brain res. rev. 21:195–218.
mcnaught, k. s., perl, d. p., brownell, a. l., and olanow, c. w. (2004). systemic exposure to
proteasome inhibitors causes a progressive model of parkinson’s disease. ann. neurol. 56:149–
162.
mizuno, y., yoshino, h., ikebe, s., hattori, n., kobayashi, t., shimoda-matsubayashi, s., matsumine,
h., and kondo, t. (1998). mitochondrial dysfunction in parkinson’s disease. ann. neurol. 44(suppl
1):s99–s109.
mizuno, y. (2006). progress in familial parkinson’s disease. in riederer, p. (eds.), proceedings of
the 16th international congress on parkinson’s disease and related disorders. j. neural transm,
in press.
mochizuki, h., nishi, k., and mizuno, y. (1993). iron-melanin complex is toxic to dopaminergic neurons
in a nigrostriatal co-culture. neurodegeneration 2:1–7.
mogi, m., harada, m., riederer, p., narabayashi, h., fujita, k., and nagatsu, t. (1994a). tumor necrosis
factor-alpha (tnf-alpha) increases both in the brain and cerebrospinal ﬂuid from parkinsonian
patients. neurosci. lett. 165:208–210.
mogi, m., harada, m., kondo, t., riderer, p., inagaki, h., miura, m., and nagatsu, t. (1994b). interleukin
1-beta, interleukin-6, epidermal growth factor and transforming growth factor-alpha are elevated in
the brain from parkinsonian patients. neurosci. lett. 180:147–150.
mogi, m., harada, m., kondo, t., mizuno, y., narabayashi, h., riederer, p., and nagatsu, t. (1996). bcl-2
protein is increased in the brain from parkinsonian patients. neurosci. lett. 215:137–139.
mogi, m., togari, a., ogawa, m., ikeguchi, k., shizuma, n., fan, d.-s., nakano, i., and nagatsu, t. (1998).
effects of repeated administration of 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1, 2, 3, 6- tetrahydropyridine (mptp) to
mice on interleukin-1beta and nerve growth factor in the striatum. neusci. lett. 250:25–28.
mogi, m., and nagatsu, t. (1999). neurotrophins and cytokines in parkinson’s disease. adv. neurol.
80:135–139.
mogi, m., togari, a., kondo, t., mizuno, y., komure, o., kuno, s., ichinose, h., and nagatsu, t. (2000).
caspase activities and tumor necrosis factor receptor r1 level are elevated in the substantia nigra in
parkinson’s disease. j. neural. transm. 107:335–341.
moser, a., and koempf, d. (1992). presence of methyl-6,7-dihydroxy-1,2,3,4-tetrahydroisoquinolines,
derivatives of the neurotoxin isoquinoline, in parkinsonian lumbar csf. life sci. 50:1885–1891.
nagakubo, d., taira, t., kitaura, h., ikeda, m., tamai, k., iguchi-ariga, s. m. m., and ariga, h. (1997).
dj-1, a novel oncogene which transforms mouse nih3t3 cells in cooperation with ras. biochem.
biophys. res. commun. 231:509–513.
nagata, s., and goldstein, p. (1995). the fas death factor. science 267:1449–1456.
nagatsu, t. (1997). isoquinoline neurotoxins and parkinson’s disease. neurosci. res. 29:99–111.
nagatsu, t. (2002a). parkinson’s disease: changes in apoptosis-related facors suggesting possible gene
nagatsu, t. (2002b). amine-related neurotoxins in parkinson’s disease. past, present, and future. neuro-
therapy. j. neural transm. 109:731–745.
toxicol teratol 24:565–569.
nagatsu, t., and ichinose, h. (1999). molecular biology of catecholamine-related enzymes in relation to
parkinson’s disease. cell. mol. neurobiol. 19:57–66.
nagatsu, t., mogi, m., ichinose, h., togari, a., and riederer, p. (1999). cytokines in parkinson’s disease.
neurosci. news 2:88–90.
transm. suppl 58:143–151.
nagatsu, t., mogi, m., ichinose, h., and togari, h. (2000a). cytokines in parkinson’s disease. j. neural.
nagatsu, t., mogi, m., ichinose, h., and togari, a. (2000b). changes in cytokines and neurotrophins in
parkinson’s disease. j. neural transm. suppl. 60:277–290.
nagatsu, t., and sawada, m. (2005). inﬂammatory process in parkinson’s disease: role for cytokines.
curr. pharmac. design 11:999–1016.
cellular and molecular mechanisms of parkinson’s disease
801
naoi, m., maruyama, w., dostert, p., hashizume, y., nakahara, d., takahashi, t., and ota, m. (1996).
dopamine-derived endogenous 1(r), 2(n)-dimethyl-6,7-dihydroxy-1,2,3,4-tetrahydroisoquinoline,
n-methyl-(r)-salsolonol, induced parkinsonism in rats: biochemical, pathological and behavioral
studies. brain res. 709:285–295.
niwa, t., takeda, n., kaneda, n., hashizume, y., and nagatsu, t. (1987). presence of tetrahydroiso-
quinoline and 2-methyl-tetrahydroisoquinoline in parkinsonian and normal human brains. biochem.
biophys. res. commun. 144:1084–1089.
norris, e. h., giasson, b. i., and lee, v. m. (2004). alpha-synuclein: normal function and role in neu-
rodegenerative diseases. curr. top. dev. biol. 60:17–54.
ohta, s., kohno, m., makino, y., tachikawa, o., and hirobe, o. (1997). tetrahydroisoquinoline and
1-methyl-tetrahydroisoquinoline are present in the human brain. biomed. res. 8:453–456.
paisan-ruiz, c., jain, s., evans, e. w., gilks, w. p., simon, j., van der brug, m., de munain, a. l., aparicio,
s., gil, a. m., khan, n., johnson, j., martinez, j. r., nicholl, d., carrera, i. m., pena, a. s., de silva,
r., lees, a., marti-masso, j. f., perez-tur, j., wood, n. w., and singleton, a. b. (2004). cloning
of the gene containing mutations that cause park8-linked parkinson’s disease. neuron 44:595–
600.
panov, a., dikalov, s., shalbuyeva, n., taylor, g., sherer, t., and greenamyre, j. t. (2005). rotenone
model of parkinson’s disease: multiple brain mitochondria dysfunctions after short-term systemic
rotenone intoxication. j. biol. chem. 280:42026–42035.
polymeropoulos, m. h., lavedan, c., leroy, e., ide, s. e., deheijia, a., dutra, a., pike, b.,
root, h., rubenstein, j., boyer, r., stenrous, e. s., chandrasekharappa, s., athanassiadou, a.,
papapetropoulos, t., johnson, w. g., lazzarini, a. m., duvoiosin, r. c., diiorio, g., golbe, l. i., and
nussbaum, r. l. (1997). mutation in the alpha-synuclein gene identiﬁed in families with parkinson’s
disease. science 276:2045–2047.
sacchetti, p., mitchell, t. r., grameman, j. g., and bannon, m. j. (2001). nurr1 enhances transcription of
the human dopamine transporter gene through a novel mechanism. j. neurochem. 76:1565–1572.
sawada, m., imamura, k., and nagatsu, t. (2006). role of cytokines in inﬂammatory process in parkinson’s
disease. in riederer, p. (ed.) proceedings of the 16th international congress on parkinson’s disease
and related disorders. j. neural transm. in press.
schapira, a. h. v., gu, m., taanman, j.-w., tabrizi, s. j., seaton, t., cleeter, m., and cooper, j. m.
(1998). mitochondria in the etiology and pathogenesis of parkinson’s disease. ann. neurol. 44(suppl
1):s89–s98.
segawa, m., nomura, y., and nishiyama, n. (2003). autosomal dominant guanosine triphosphate cyclo-
hydrolase i deﬁciency (segawa disease). ann. neurol. 54(suppl. 6):s32–s45.
selkoe, d. (2004). cell biology of protein misfolding: the example of alzheimer’s and parkinson’s disease.
nat. cell biol 6:1054–1061.
shen, j. (2004). protein kinases linked to the pathogenesis of parkinson’s disease. neuron 44:575–577.
shimura, h., hattori, n., kubo, s., mizuno, y., asakawa, s., minoshima, s., shimizu, n., imai, k., chiba,
t., tanaka, k., and suzuki, t. (2000). familial parkinson gene product, parkin, is a ubiquitin-protein
ligase. nature genet 25:302–305.
shimura, h., schlossmacher, m. g., hattori, n., frosch, m. p., trockenbacher, a., schneider, r., mizuno,
y., kosik, k. s., and selko, d. j. (2001). ubiquitination of a new form of alpha-synuclein by parkin
from human brain: implications for parkinson’s disease. science 293:263–269.
sherer, t. b., kim, j. h., batarbet, r., and greenamyre, j. t. (2003). subcutaneous rotenone exposure
causes highly selective dopaminergic degeneration and alpha-synuclein aggregation. exp. neurol.
179:9–16.
singleton, a. b., farrer, m., johnson, j., singleton, a., hague, s., kachergus, j., hulihan, m., peuralinna,
t., dutra, a., and nussbaum, r. (2003). alpha-synuclein locus triplication causes parkinson’s disease.
science 302:841.
snyder, s. h. (2005). messengers of life and death. society for neuroscience 2005: program no. 467.
spillantini, m. g., crowther, r. a., jakes, r., hasegawa, m., and goedert, m. (1998). alpha-synuclein
in ﬁlamentous inclusions of lewy bodies from parkinson’s disease and dementia with lewy bodies.
proc. natl. acad. sci. usa 95:6469–6473.
tasaki, y., makino, y., ohta, s., and hirobe, m. (1991). 1-methyl-1.2.3.4-tetrahydroisoquinoline, de-
creased in 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine-treated mouse, prevents parkinsonism-like
behavior abnormalities. j. neurochem. 57:1940–1943.
tatton, w., chalmers-redman, r., and tatton, n. (2003). neuroprotection by deprenyl and other propar-
gylamines: glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase rather than monoamine oxidase. j. neural
transm. 110:509–515.
tretter, l., sipos, i., and adam-vizi, v. (2004). initiation of neuronal damage by complex i deﬁciency
and oxidative stress in parkinson’s disease. neurochem. res. 29:569–577.
802
nagatsu and sawada
valente, e. m., abou-sleiman, p. m., caputo, v., muqit, m. m. k., harvey, k., gispert, s., ali, z., del
turco, d., bentivoglio, a. r., healy, d. g., albanese, a., nussbaum, r., gonzalez-maldonado, r.,
deller, t., salvi, s., cortelli, p., gilks, w. p., latchman, d. s., harvey, r. j., dallapiccola, b., auburger,
g., and wood, n. w. (2004). hereditary early-onset parkinson’s disease caused by mutations in
pink1. science 304:1158–1160.
vawter, m. p., dillon-carter, o., tourtellotte, w. w., carvey, p., and freed, w. j. (1996). tgf beta1 and
tgf beta2 concentrations are elevated in parkinson’s disease in ventricular cerebrospinal ﬂuid. exp.
neurol. 142:313–322.
vila, m., and przedborski, s. (2004). genetic clues to the pathogenesis of parkinson’s disease. nat. med.
s58–s62.
vilhardt, f., plastre, o., sawada, m., suzuki, k., wiznerowicz, m., kiyokawa, e., trono, d., and krause,
k.-h. (2002). the hiv-1 nef protein and phagocyte nadph oxidase activation. j. biol. chem.
277:42136–42143.
warbt, s., macdonald, m. l. e., and abrahams, b. s. (2003). new mutations, new etiologies for parkinson
disease. clin. genet. 63:352–357.
webb, j. l., ravikumar, b., atkins, j., skepper, j. n., and rubinstein, d. c. (2003). alpha-synclein is
degraded by both autophagy and the proteasome. j. biol. chem. 278:25009–25013.
wood, p. l. (2003). microglia: role of microglia in chronic neurodegeneration. in wood, p. l. (ed.)
neuroinﬂammation. humana press, totowa, nj, pp. 3–27.
yamada, m., iwatsubo, t., mizuno, y., and mochizuki, h. (2004). overexpression of alpha-synuclein in
rat substantia nigra and activation of caspase-9: resemblance to pathogenetic changes in parkinson’s
disease. j. neurochem. 91:451–461.
yang, y., nishimura, i., imai, y., takahashi, r., and lu, b. (2003). parkin suppresses dopaminergic
neuron-selective neurotoxicity induced by pael-r in drosophila. neuron 37:911–924.
youdim, m. b. h., and riederer, p. (1997). understanding parkinson’s disease. scientiﬁc american,
pp. 82–89.
zimprich, a., biskup, s., leitner, p., lichtner, p., farrer, m., lincoln, s., kachergus, j., hulihan, m.,
uitti, r. j., calne, d. b., stoessel, a. j., pfeiffer, r. f., patenge, n., carbajal, i. c., vieregge, p.,
asmus, f., mueller-myhsok, b., dickson, d. w., meitinger, t., strom, t. m., wszolek, z. k., and
gasser, t. (2004). mutations in lrrk2 cause autosomal-dominant parkinsonism with pleomorphic
pathology. neuron 44:601–607.