legionella pneumophila inhibits macrophage
apoptosis by targeting pro-death members
of the bcl2 protein family
simran banga*, ping gao*, xihui shen*, valena fiscus†, wei-xing zong‡, lingling chen†, and zhao-qing luo*§
*department of biological sciences, purdue university, 915 west state street, west lafayette, in 47907; †department of biology, indiana university, 915
east third street, bloomington, in 47405; and ‡department of molecular genetics and microbiology, stony brook university, stony brook, ny 11794
edited by frederick m. ausubel, harvard medical school, boston, ma, and approved january 30, 2007 (received for review december 12, 2006)
to establish a vacuole that supports bacterial replication, legio-
nella pneumophila translocates a large number of bacterial pro-
teins into host cells via the dot/icm type iv secretion system.
functions of most of these translocated proteins are unknown, but
recent investigations suggest their roles in modulating diverse host
processes such as vesicle trafﬁcking, autophagy, ubiquitination,
and apoptosis. cells infected by l. pneumophila exhibited resis-
tance to apoptotic stimuli, but the bacterial protein directly in-
volved in this process remained elusive. we show here that sidf,
one substrate of the dot/icm transporter, is involved in the inhi-
bition of infected cells from undergoing apoptosis to allow max-
imal bacterial multiplication. permissive macrophages harboring a
replicating sidf mutant are more apoptotic and more sensitive to
staurosporine-induced cell death. furthermore, cells expressing
sidf are resistant to apoptosis stimuli. sidf contributes to apopto-
sis resistance in l. pneumophila-infected cells by speciﬁcally inter-
acting with and neutralizing the effects of bnip3 and bcl-rambo,
two proapoptotic members of bcl2 protein family. thus, inhibiting
the functions of host pro-death proteins by translocated effectors
constitutes a mechanism for l. pneumophila to protect host cells
from apoptosis.
bacterial pathogenesis 兩 type iv secretion 兩 intracellular pathogen 兩
cell death
programmed cell death plays an important role in the defense
against pathogens, and manipulation of host cell apoptotic
processes could determine the outcome of the interplay between
the host cell and a pathogen (1). many pathogens have thus
evolved various sophisticated strategies to manipulate the exe-
cution of programmed cell death pathways for successful colo-
nization of the host. among these, a variety of viruses code for
proteins that specifically inhibit host apoptotic pathways to
ensure maximal multiplication (1). similarly, some bacterial
pathogens such as chlamydia trachomatis and bartonella
henselae suppress cell death in infected cells (2, 3).
legionella pneumophila is a facultative intracellular pathogen
capable of multiplying in a wide spectrum of eukaryotic cells.
intracellular growth of l. pneumophila requires the dot/icm
type iv protein translocation system that injects a large number
of bacterial effectors into host cells (4). these translocated
bacterial proteins are believed to reorchestrate host cellular
processes, thus allowing the vacuole containing internalized l.
pneumophila to undergo a unique trafficking route that bypasses
the endocytic pathways. by intercepting vesicles originating from
the endoplasmic reticulum (er), the l. pneumophila-containing
vacuole eventually is transformed into a compartment charac-
teristic of rough er (5). consistent with this notion, l. pneu-
mophila modulates the activities of vesicle trafficking regulatory
molecules such as small gtpases arf1 and rab1 by translocated
guanine nucleotide exchange factors specific for these proteins,
thus facilitating the acquisition of er materials and the subse-
quent intracellular bacterial multiplication (6–8).
modulation of nonvesicle trafficking pathways by l. pneumo-
phila also is important for its intracellular replication; pertur-
bation of the er-associated degradation machinery by rnai
leads to repression of bacterial growth, suggesting that this
pathogen exploits the proteasome-dependent protein degrada-
tion system (9). in mammalian cells, infection by l. pneumophila
leads to the activation of two independent cell death pathways.
in murine macrophages expressing a restrictive allele of birc1e,
a gene encoding a member of the nucleotide binding oligomer-
ization (nod) proteins that sense the presence of intracellular
invaders (10), infection of l. pneumophila leads to activation of
caspase 1 and subsequent cell death (11). recent studies indi-
cated that activation of this caspase 1-dependent cell death
pathway requires the bacterial flagellin protein as well as the
dot/icm transporter (12, 13). in permissive macrophages, early
studies suggested that l. pneumophila actively induces apoptosis
via the activation of caspase 3 (14). however, recent studies
indicate that vigorous bacterial replication did not lead to
apoptosis in infected cells (15). instead, macrophages harboring
actively replicating l. pneumophila exhibit strong resistance to
exogenous cell death stimuli (16). these observations indicate
that an apoptotic process is initiated in macrophages in response
to l. pneumophila infection and replication, but the bacteria are
able to inhibit or reverse the process in a dot/icm-dependent
manner, possibly by injecting effectors that can interfere with
apoptotic pathways. consistent with this hypothesis, two recent
studies showed that a large number of antiapoptotic genes were
induced in cells infected by virulent l. pneumophila strains via
the activation of the multifunctional transcriptional regulator
nf-␬b (17, 18). moreover, the dot/icm substrate sdha was
recently shown to be required for protecting macrophages from
cell death by a yet-unknown mechanism (19). in this study we
present evidence that the dot/icm system substrate sidf (20) is
involved in inhibition of host cell death during l. pneumophila
intracellular growth in permissive macrophages, at least in part
by directly interacting with and neutralizing the activities of two
pro-death members of the bcl2 protein family.
results
permissive macrophages infected by a sidfmutant are more apoptotic.
after verifying dot/icm-mediated translocation of sidf into in-
fected cells during infection [see supporting information (si) fig. 7],
author contributions: s.b., p.g., x.s., and z.-q.l. designed research; s.b., p.g., x.s., v.f., and
z.-q.l. performed research; w.-x.z. and l.c. contributed new reagents/analytic tools; s.b.,
p.g., x.s., and z.-q.l. analyzed data; and z.-q.l. wrote the paper.
the authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
this article is a pnas direct submission.
abbreviations: er, endoplasmic reticulum; moi, multiplicity of infection.
§to whom correspondence should be addressed. e-mail: luoz@purdue.edu.
this article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/cgi/content/full/
0611030104/dc1.
© 2007 by the national academy of sciences of the usa
www.pnas.org兾cgi兾doi兾10.1073兾pnas.0611030104
pnas 兩 march 20, 2007 兩 vol. 104 兩 no. 12 兩 5121–5126
phenotypes associated with infection by the sidf mutant. (a) the sidf
fig. 1.
mutant formed fewer large phagosomes. mouse macrophages were infected
at an moi of 1, and the distribution of vacuoles was determined at 14 h after
infection as described (32). strains tested are lp02(intact dot/icm),
lp03(dota⫺) (data not shown), lp02⌬sidf, and lp02⌬sidf harboring
pzl623(psidf). data are from two independent experiments performed in
triplicate, and ⬎150 vacuoles were scored in each sample. (b) mouse macro-
phages infected with a sidf mutant are more apoptotic. uninfected cells and
cells infected with lp02(dot/icm intact), lp03(dota⫺), or lp02(⌬sidf) and
lp02(⌬sidf/psidf) for 14 h were ﬁxed. intracellular bacteria were labeled by
indirect ﬂuorescence staining with anti-l. pneumophila antibody, and the
apoptotic status of the cells was probed by tunel staining. samples were
scored for fragmented chromatin by counting infected cells displaying posi-
tive tunel signals. similar data were obtained from more than ﬁve indepen-
dent experiments, and data from one representative experiment are shown.
we studied the function of sidf by analyzing a sidf mutant for
several cell biological characteristics associated with vacuoles
containing l. pneumophila. in murine bone marrow-derived
macrophages the mutant was defective in intracellular growth,
consistently exhibiting an ⬇3-fold growth defect (si fig. 8).
consistent with this observation, in mouse macrophage the sidf
mutant formed a significantly lower percentage of vacuoles
containing ⬎10 bacteria (fig. 1a). no growth defect was de-
tected in the human monocytic cell line u937 or in the amoeba
host dictystelium discoideum (si fig. 9a and data not shown).
despite its detectable intracellular growth defect in mouse
macrophage, the sidf mutant still is able to efficiently avoid
fusion with lysosome; it also can efficiently acquire er proteins
such as calnexin and bip (data not shown). thus, we asked
whether sidf is involved in modulating host apoptotic pathways
by examining the apoptotic status of cells infected with the sidf
mutant. in mouse macrophages 1 h after infection, no difference
was observed between uninfected cells and cells infected by any
strains. in each case, ⬍5% of the cells stained positively for
apoptosis (data not shown). at the 14-h time point no change in
the proportion of apoptotic cells was observed in samples
infected by the dota mutant lp03, with ⬍5% of the infected cells
staining positively for apoptosis (fig. 1b). approximately 6% of
cells infected with the wild-type strain lp02 appeared apoptotic
(fig. 1b). however, ⬇22% of the cells infected by the sidf
mutant were apoptotic at this time point, significantly higher
than that of cells infected by the wild-type strain (p ⬍ 0.02) (fig.
1b). the apoptosis rate of cells infected by the sidf mutant can
be partially suppressed by introducing a plasmid carrying the
sidf gene (fig. 1b). the incomplete complementation most
likely results from overexpression of sidf from the high-copy
plasmid (si fig. 7), probably by interfering with the translocation
of apoptosis-inducing effectors. such an increased cell death rate
also was observed in u937 cells (si fig. 9b). taken together,
these data suggest that sidf is involved in the inhibition of host
cell apoptosis during infection.
sidf contributes to cell death resistance in macrophages infected by
wild-type l. pneumophila. macrophages harboring replicating l.
pneumophila exhibit resistance to apoptosis stimuli (16). to
fig. 2.
sidf is important in apoptosis resistance exhibited in l. pneumophila-
infected macrophages. uninfected u937 or cells infected with lp02(dot/icm
intact), lp03(dota⫺), lp02(⌬sidf), or lp02(⌬sidf/psidf) at an moi of 1 for 8 h were
treated with 2 ␮m staurosporine for an additional 4 h. after ﬁxation, bacterial
vacuoles were labeled by immunostaining, and the morphology of cell nuclei was
labeled with hoechst staining. the apoptotic status of infected cells was scored by
counting infected cells displaying fragmented nuclei. data shown are averages of
three independent experiments, with standard deviations.
examine whether sidf contributes to such resistance, we infected
u937 cells with l. pneumophila and subsequently treated these
cells with staurosporine for 4 h. the apoptotic status of infected
cells was examined by hoechst staining followed by microscopic
inspection. in samples infected for 2 h, 4 h of staurosporine
treatment resulted in extensive cell death in all samples, with
⬇80% of the infected cells appearing apoptotic (data not
shown). in samples that had been infected for 8 h, ⬇78% of the
cells infected by the dota mutant were apoptotic, a rate similar
to the 82% observed in the uninfected samples (fig. 2). con-
sistent with earlier studies (16), cells infected by the wild-type
strain were resistant to this cell death stimulus, with only ⬇26%
of the cells being apoptotic (fig. 2). however, the ratio of
apoptotic cells in the sidf mutant infection is ⬇58%, a value
significantly higher than that of cells infected by the wild type
(p ⬍ 0.01) (fig. 2). furthermore, expression of sidf from a
plasmid in the mutant fully restored resistance to staurosporine,
with ⬇28% of the infected cells being apoptotic (fig. 2). similar
results were obtained when infection was allowed to proceed for
10 h before adding staurosporine (data not shown). these data
further suggested a role of sidf in apoptosis resistance conferred
by cells harboring replicating l. pneumophila.
mammalian cells expressing sidf are resistant to staurosporine-
induced apoptosis. the above observations strongly suggested
that sidf is directly involved in blocking apoptosis in cells
infected by virulent l. pneumophila. to further demonstrate the
cell death inhibition activity of sidf, we transduced two different
cell lines with adenoviral particles containing a sidf expression
construct and examined whether cells expressing sidf confer
resistance to apoptosis stimuli. twenty-four hours after trans-
duction, we treated the cells with 1 ␮m staurosporine and
examined cell death by nuclear staining. in hela cells this agent
induced apoptosis in most control cells transduced with a virus
containing vector dna, with ⬇68%, 88%, and 95% of the cells
being apoptotic after drug treatment for 3.5, 7, and 10 h,
respectively (fig. 3 c–e). in contrast, many sidf-expressing cells
survived, with only 31%, 36%, and 46% of the cells having
succumbed to the drug (fig. 3 a, b, and e).
in u937 cells transduced with control vector viruses, drug
treatment for 3.5 h resulted in ⬇49% apoptosis, whereas only 24%
of the cells transduced to express sidf were apoptotic. extending
drug treatment to 7 and 10 h led to more extensive apoptotic cells
death in cells not expressing sidf, with ⬇68% and 96% showing
apoptotic nuclear morphology, respectively (fig. 3b). in samples
5122 兩 www.pnas.org兾cgi兾doi兾10.1073兾pnas.0611030104
banga et al.
two pro-death bcl2 proteins in the yeast two-hybrid assay, we
determined whether sidf could form complexes with these two
proteins in mammalian cells. first, we expressed sidf and
flag-tagged bnip3 in 293t cells, lysed the cells with nonidet
p-40 and immunoprecipitated possible sidf/bnip3 complexes
with anti-sidf antibody. as shown in fig. 4b, bnip3 was present
in immunoprecipitates only when sidf was coexpressed. the
migration pattern of bnip3 is similar to that previously reported,
consisting of three bands of ⬇60 kda (dimer), 30 kda, and 22
kda (monomer) (23). no signals were detected in untransfected
samples or in samples transfected with plasmids expressing only
bnip3 or sidf, indicating that the interactions were specific.
reciprocal experiments using the anti-flag antibody also
specifically precipitated sidf (data not shown). these results
indicated that sidf forms a protein complex with bnip3 in
mammalian cells.
we also analyzed interactions between sidf and bcl-rambo.
first, we coexpressed sidf and flag-tagged bcl-rambo and
analyzed precipitates using anti-sidf antibody; interactions be-
tween flag-bcl-rambo and sidf can be readily detected (fig. 4d).
second, we analyzed whether sidf interacts with endogenous
bcl-rambo. we first prepared a bcl-rambo-specific antibody with a
recombinant protein (see materials and methods). this antibody
specifically recognized bcl-rambo expressed in several cell lines in
a pattern similar to that described earlier (data not shown and ref.
21). we then transfected 293t cells with a plasmid expressing sidf
or the empty vector and prepared precipitates with our anti-bcl-
rambo antibody; sidf was detected not only in precipitates from
cells transfected to overexpress bcl-rambo, but also in cells trans-
fected with the control vector (fig. 4e), indicating that sidf forms
a complex with endogenous bcl-rambo (fig. 4e). furthermore, the
amount of sidf detected from cells expressing exogenous bcl-
rambo was considerably higher than that from vector-transfected
cells (fig. 4e).
we further examined interactions between sidf and bcl-
rambo under infection condition. to this end, lysates of u937
cells infected with relevant l. pneumophila strains at a multi-
plicity of infection (moi) of 5 for 6 h were analyzed. immuno-
precipitates were prepared by using anti-bcl-rambo antibody,
and the presence of sidf in the precipitates was probed. al-
though sidf was not detected in precipitates from cells infected
with the wild-type strain lp02, we were able to detect this protein
in immunoprecipitates obtained from cells infected with the
sidf overexpressing strain (fig. 4f). as expected, no sidf was
detected in total lysates of cells infected with the dot/icm-
deficient strain lp03 overexpressing sidf or the sidf deletion
mutant (fig. 4f). the failure to detect protein complex formed
by sidf and bcl-rambo in cells infected with wild-type bacteria
most likely is due to the low abundance of sidf injected into
those cells by this bacterial strain (fig. 4f, input). this obser-
vation is consistent with our sidf immunostaining data in which
almost all phagosomes containing this sidf-overexpressing
strain stained positively for this protein (si fig. 7). the associ-
ation of sidf with bcl-rambo in infected cells further strength-
ened our conclusion that bcl-rambo is one target of sidf.
we next established an in vitro assay to analyze whether sidf
directly binds bcl-rambo. despite a predicted hydrophobic do-
main in its carboxyl terminus, we found that a portion of
bacterially expressed gst-bcl-rambo was soluble in pbs buffer,
and thus we have affinity-purified this protein to ⬇90% purity
(fig. 4g). we performed a pull-down experiment by incubating
purified sidf with glutathione-resin or resin coated with the
gst-bcl-rambo or gst. after extensive washes, we found that
sidf was retained only by resin coated with gst-bcl-rambo (fig.
4h), indicating that sidf directly binds bcl-rambo and that the
interactions between these two proteins can occur after they
have properly folded.
cells expressing sidf are resistant to apoptosis induced by stauro-
fig. 3.
sporine. hela cells were transduced with adenovirus particles harboring a
construct directing expression of a gfp::sidf chimera (a and b) or gfp (c and
d) for 24 h before being treated with 1 ␮m staurosporine for 7 h. the nuclear
morphology was visualized by hoechst 33342 staining (pseudocolored in red
for ease in distinguishing) (b and d). (scale bar: 20 ␮m.) (e and f) kinetic
analysis of apoptotic status of the hela cells (e) and u937 cells (f). transduced
cells treated with 1 ␮m staurosporine for 3.5, 7, and 10 h were ﬁxed, stained,
and scored for the rates of apoptosis. data shown are one representative of at
least three independent experiments performed in triplicate, with at least 350
cells inspected for each sample. *, p ⬍ 0.05; **, p ⬍ 0.01.
transduced to express sidf, such incubation times caused signifi-
cantly less apoptosis, with ⬇46% and 72% of the cells displaying
condensed nuclei (p ⬍ 0.01) (fig. 3b). taken together, these data
revealed that cells expressing sidf exhibited strong resistance to cell
death insults. moreover, the increased apoptotic rates after pro-
longed drug treatment indicated that sidf does not completely
block staurosporine-induced apoptosis, but rather delays the onset
of cell death, particularly in u937 cells.
sidf interacts with bnip3 and bcl-rambo, two pro-death members of
the bcl2 protein family. sidf is not homologous to any known
protein, making it difficult to understand the molecular mech-
anisms of its cell death inhibition activity and the importance of
such activities in the intracellular replication of l. pneumophila.
thus, we set up a yeast two-hybrid screening to identify host
proteins that specifically interact with sidf. analysis of clones
appearing on selective medium led to the identification of several
proteins, including bnip3 and bcl-rambo, two proteins belong-
ing to the bcl2 protein family as putative binding targets of sidf
(si table 1) (21, 22). given the cell death related observations
discussed above, we chose to focus on bnip3 and bcl-rambo. in
the cdna clone harboring bnip3, the activation domain (ad)
of gal4 was fused to the 42nd residue of the target with an
intact c terminus. in the case of bcl-rambo, the fusion occurred
at residue 296 of the 485-residue protein and the chimera also
contains an intact c terminus. reconstructed ad::bnip3 and
ad::bcl-rambo fusions showed similar specific interactions with
sidf in a yeast two-hybrid assay (fig. 4a).
to substantiate the interactions seen between sidf and these
banga et al.
pnas 兩 march 20, 2007 兩 vol. 104 兩 no. 12 兩 5123
fig. 4.
sidf interacts with bnip3 and bcl-rambo. (a) interactions between sidf and bcl2-rambo/bnip3 in yeast two-hybrid assay. yeast strains harboring the
indicated constructs were streaked on leu⫺ and trp⫺ synthetic medium to select for plasmids (on the left) or on leu⫺, trp⫺, ade⫺, and his⫺ medium to examine
the interactions (on the right). the two sidf deletion mutants tested were sidf⌬n1, sidf250 –912 and sidf⌬n2, sidf650 –912. (b) sidf forms complexes with bnip3.
cell lysates of 293t cells transfected with the indicated plasmid combinations were analyzed either directly or after immunoprecipitation by immunoblots with
an anti-flag antibody. relevant molecular mass markers are shown on the left in kilodaltons. (c) sidf in total cell lysates was detected by anti-sidf antibody.
(d–f) sidf interacts with bcl-rambo in mammalian cells. (d) 293t cells were transfected with the indicated plasmid combinations, and cell lysates were used for
immunoprecipitation. flag-bcl-rambo was detected with an anti-flag antibody. (e) sidf forms a complex with endogenous bcl-rambo. sidf was probed in
immunoprecipitates obtained with anti-bcl-rambo antibody from cells transfected with shown plasmid combinations. note that more sidf was detected in
precipitates of cells transfected with a bcl-rambo-expressing plasmid. (f) sidf and bcl-rambo form a complex in cells infected by a dot/icm-competent strain
overexpressing sidf. lysates of u937 cells infected with wild-type (lane 1), dota⫺(psidf) (lane 2), the sidf⫺ mutant (lane 3), or ⌬sidf(psidf) (lane 4) for 6 h were
subjected to immunoprecipitation with anti-bcl-rambo antibody, and the presence of sidf/bcl-rambo complexes was probed with anti-sidf antibody. (g and h)
sidf directly binds bcl-rambo. (g) puriﬁcation of gst-bcl-rambo. relevant molecular mass markers are shown on the left in kda. (h) binding between bcl-rambo
and sidf. glutathione beads or beads coated with gst or gst-bcl-rambo were incubated with sidf for 4 h at 4°c. after extensive washing, bound proteins were
eluted with sds loading buffer, resolved by sds/page, and probed with anti-sidf antibody (lower). ten percent of input proteins were detected by coomassie
bright blue staining (upper).
sidf inhibits cell death induced by bcl-rambo. a common feature for
antiapoptotic proteins that target pro-death proteins is their
ability to inhibit cell death induced by their counterparts (24).
our observation that cells expressing sidf are resistant to cell
death stimuli and that sidf specifically interacts with bnip3 and
bcl-rambo suggested that sidf is able to protect cell death
induced by these proteins. thus, we cotransfected mcf-7 cells
with constructs expressing sidf and bcl-rambo. twenty-four
hours after transfection, cells were fixed and assessed for apo-
ptosis by staining with hoechst 33342. in cells transfected with
vector dna or cells transfected to express only sidf, ⬍18% of
the cells appeared apoptotic (fig. 5). as expected, in samples
transfected to express bcl-rambo, ⬎50% of the cells are apo-
ptotic (fig. 5). in cells transfected to express both bcl-rambo and
sidf, the rate of apoptotic cells decreased to ⬇27%, significantly
lower than samples expressing only bcl-rambo (p ⬍ 0.05) (fig.
5). these results indicated that sidf is able to inhibit cell death
induced by bcl-rambo, further establishing the role of sidf in
preventing cell death.
a domain localized to the c-terminal half of sidf is important for its
activity. induction of apoptosis by pro-death members of the bcl2
family in part is by titrating its pro-survival counterparts via the
formation of heteromultimers through the bh motif (24). be-
cause sidf does not contain any detectable bh domain, we
defined its target-binding domains by deletion analysis. in yeast
two-hybrid analysis, we found that a sidf mutant lacking as many
as 750 aa from its n terminus still strongly interacts with
bcl-rambo and bnip3 (fig. 4a and data not shown). in mam-
malian cells, these mutants are still able to form complexes with
bcl-rambo (fig. 6a). furthermore, the cell death inhibition
activity of the sidf⌬n250 mutant was indistinguishable from
that of the full-length sidf (fig. 6c). however, loss of ⬎650 aa
from the n terminus of sidf resulted in mutants that no longer
are able to inhibit activity of bcl-rambo (fig. 6c).
5124 兩 www.pnas.org兾cgi兾doi兾10.1073兾pnas.0611030104
banga et al.
agreement with the loss of target binding activity, none of these
mutants retained the ability to inhibit the activity of bcl-rambo
(fig. 6c). taken together, these results indicated that a carboxyl
domain of sidf is important for target binding, but inhibition of
apoptosis required a larger region extending to the central
portion of the protein. the two putative hydrophobic domains
may be directly involved in target binding or may be required for
proper folding of sidf and thus subsequent target binding
activity. interestingly, the location of this functional domain is
similar to the bid domain of bepa, a b. henselae protein that
inhibits apoptosis by inducing camp production (3).
discussion
it is well established that l. pneumophila actively modulates host
apoptotic pathways. such modulation can occur at the transcrip-
tional level because infection by l. pneumophila leads to the
induction of several antiapoptotic genes via the activation of an
nf-␬b-dependent pathway (17, 18). transcription of a number
of pro-death genes, including the bh-3-only protein bnip3 and
many caspases, also was elevated in response to intracellular
growth of the bacterium (17). the induction of pro-death genes
poses a problem for infected cells because these proteins sensi-
tize cells to environmental insults, which, during l. pneumophila
infection, can be represented by intracellular growth of the
bacterium or the translocation of toxic substrates into host cells
(19). here we present evidence that the bacterial protein sidf
interferes with host cell death by directly interacting with and
inhibiting activities of apoptotic proteins.
several lines of evidence indicate that binding of sidf to its
targets is highly specific. first, these proteins were identified
multiple times independently in our original yeast two-hybrid
screening (si table 1); second, binding of sidf to bcl-rambo can
be detected under various conditions, including in cells in which
sidf is delivered directly from the bacterium (fig. 4f); third,
sidf did not detectably interact with several other pro-death
proteins structurally similar to bnip3 and bcl-rambo (data not
shown). clearly, binding to the targets is not sufficient for sidf
to exert its activities because n-terminal deletion mutants of
sidf lacking ⬎650 residues were still able to bind bcl-rambo
efficiently but failed to confer protection (fig. 6 a and c). how
elements not directly involved in target binding contribute to the
cell death inhibitory activity remains to be determined.
sidf appears to play a role in preventing cell death by
abolishing the activities of bnip3 and bcl-rambo. formation of
heterodimers between proapoptotic and antiapoptotic members
of the bcl2 protein family determines at least in part the
susceptibility of cells to death signals (24). the mechanism of
action of sidf seems similar to that of the cell-death inhibiting
19-kda protein from adenovirus which inhibits activities of
multiple pro-death proteins by direct binding (22). differing
from c. trachomatis, which causes degradation of a number of
pro-death bh3-only proteins (25), infection of l. pneumophila
did not lead to destabilization of either bnip3 or bcl-rambo
(data not shown). although both bnip3 and bcl-rambo contain
a carboxyl transmembrane domain important for mitochondria
targeting and for cell death induction, their mechanisms of
action are different (21, 26). bnip3 forms heterodimers with
pro-survival members of the bcl2 protein family such as bcl2 and
bcl-xl (26), but bcl-rambo does not detectably interact with any
pro-survival members of the bcl2 protein family (21). further
analysis of how sidf exerts its activity will likely shed light on the
mechanisms of action of these host proteins.
the function of sidf appears similar to that of the cell death
protection protein sdha (19). however, unlike the mild growth
defect observed in the sidf mutant, loss of sdha resulted in a
severe growth defect accompanied by drastic morphological
changes in the infected cells (19). sdha seems to control
pathways critical for maintaining the integrity of infected cells,
fig. 5.
sidf inhibits apoptosis induced by bcl-rambo. mcf-7 cells were
transfected with the indicated plasmid combinations for 24 h, and ﬁxed cells
were stained with hoechst 33342 and scored microscopically for apoptotic
nuclei. data shown are from three independent experiments performed in
triplicate; at least 200 transfected cells were scored for each sample. cells
transfected with both plasmids were identiﬁed by a gfp signal carried on the
vector used to express sidf. *, p ⬍ 0.05.
on the other hand, mutants lacking 50 or 100 aa from the
carboxyl terminus of sidf had considerably lost their ability to
inhibit bcl-rambo, although these mutants still detectably inter-
act with bcl-rambo (fig. 6 b and c). deletion of 150 residues
from this end of sidf completely abolished both the target
binding and inhibitory activity (fig. 6 b and c). sidf contains
two predicted 22-residue hydrophobic domains that are impor-
tant for targeting the protein to the er/nuclear regions (si fig.
10). loss of a single hydrophobic domain drastically reduced its
ability to interact with bcl-rambo, whereas deletion of both such
domains abolished its bcl-rambo binding activity (fig. 6b). in
fig. 6.
the c-terminal portion of sidf is important for its activity. (a and b)
interactions between bcl-rambo and sidf mutants. 293t cells were transfected
with combinations of plasmids expressing flag-bcl-rambo and individual mu-
tants. precipitates were prepared with anti-sidf antibody (a) or with anti-bcl-
rambo antibody (b). the presence of target proteins was detected with
appropriate antibodies. in each case, 5% of the lysate used for coimmuno-
precipitation was probed for levels of input proteins in total cell lysates. (c)
inhibition of bcl-rambo activity by sidf and its derivatives. mcf-7 cells were
transfected to express sidf and its derivatives along with bcl-rambo (shaded
bars) or the vector (open bars). twenty-four hours after transfection, cells
were ﬁxed and stained with hoechst 33342 and apoptotic rates were scored.
data shown are from three independent experiments, with standard devia-
tions. *, p ⬍ 0.05; **, p ⬍ 0.01.
banga et al.
pnas 兩 march 20, 2007 兩 vol. 104 兩 no. 12 兩 5125
whereas sidf appears to function downstream of sdha by
targeting branched death pathways triggered by l. pneumophila
infection. thus, l. pneumophila is able to manipulate the
apoptotic status of infected cells at different levels, ranging from
controlling some major pathways to inhibition of specific pro-
death proteins.
protozoan is believed to be the natural host of l. pneumophila
and infection of mammalian cells was considered to be acciden-
tal (27). amoeba does not code for classic apoptotic pathways,
or for proteins such as bnip3 and bcl-rambo. given that bnip1,
a pro-death bh3-only protein of the bnip3 family is involved in
membrane fusion in the er (28),
it will be interesting to
determine whether either bnip3 or bcl-rambo possesses similar
dual functions and whether sidf interferes with such activities.
alternatively, in the light of our results and recent discoveries
that l. pneumophila manipulates several functions specific to
higher organisms, a mammalian host may have been a driving
force in the evolution of this bacterium.
materials and methods
bacterial strains, media, and plasmid construction. all l. pneumo-
phila strains used in this study were derivatives of the philadel-
phia 1 strain lp02 (29). details for manipulations of bacterial
strains, primers, and construction of plasmids are described in si
materials and methods and in si tables 2 and 3.
yeast manipulation and two-hybrid assay. yeast strains were grown
in ypd medium or in appropriate amino acid dropout minimal
media. the sidf gene was fused to the activation domain of the gal4
activator on pgbkt7 (si table 2). yeast strain pj-64a (30) was
used for two-hybrid screening against the human cdna library
according to instructions of the manufacturer (bd biosciences, san
jose, ca).
cell culture and transfection. u937 cells were cultured and dif-
ferentiated following standard protocols (31). other cell lines,
including 293t, hela, mcf-7, and cos1, were cultured in
dmem supplemented with 10% fbs. cells grown to ⬇80%
confluence were transfected with lipofectamine 2000 (invitro-
gen, carlsbad, ca) following the manufacturer’s instructions.
for experiments designed to assess the apoptosis inhibitory
activity of sidf, to ensure high efficiency of cotransfection, a
molar ratio of 1:3 (bacl-rambo:sidf) of dna was used. mouse
macrophages were prepared by using a published protocol (32)
and were plated at 2 ⫻ 105 cells per well for infection.
immunoprecipitation. we seeded 293t cells on 100-mm plates at
5 ⫻ 105 cells per plate 1 day before transfection and then
transiently transfected cells with combinations of plasmids. in all
experiments the total amount of plasmid dna was kept constant
by adding appropriate amounts of vector dna. proteins of
interest were detected by western blot after sds/page. for
coimmunoprecipitation from lysates of infected cells, 5 ⫻ 107
u937 cells were infected at an moi of 5 for 6 h with the indicated
l. pneumophila strains. cell
lysis buffer and the details of
immunoprecipitation are given in si materials and methods.
recombinant adenoviral particle preparation and transduction. sidf
was cloned into the shuttle plasmid pcmv-yfp, and a recom-
binant adenoviral vector containing sidf was obtained through
in vivo homologous recombination by using the adeasy system
(stratagene). the primary stock was propagated four times in
ad-293 cells to achieve titers of 1010 to 1012 infectious particles
per milliliter. this viral suspension was used to transduce hela
or u937 cells at an moi of 10.
cell death assays. the apoptotic status of mammalian cells was
determined by the tunel assay with the in situ cell death
detection kit tmr red (roche, indianapolis, in) or by staining
of nuclei with hoechst 33342. cell death was determined by
scoring cells with positively labeled fragmented chromatin
(tunel assay) or condensed nuclei (hoechst staining). the
rates of apoptotic cells obtained by tunel staining or by
hoechst staining are very similar.
protein purification, antibodies, immunostaining, and western blot.
details of protein purification, sources of antibodies, and con-
centrations of antibodies in each experiment are described in si
materials and methods.
we thank drs. r. isberg (tufts medical school, boston, ma) and j.
tschopp (university of lausanne, lausanne, switzerland) for reagents
and dr. art aronson and ms. virginia livingston for critical reading of
the manuscript. this work was supported by american heart association
grant 0535451z (to z.-q.l.), national institutes of health grants
r01ai069344 (to z.-q.l.) and r01gm065260 (to l.c.), and a collab-
oration in life sciences and informatics research pilot grant between
purdue university and indiana university (to z.-q.l. and l.c.).
1. creagh em, conroy h, martin sj (2003) immunol rev 193:10–21.
2. fan t, lu h, hu h, shi l, mcclarty ga, nance dm, greenberg ah, zhong
cell microbiol 9:246–264.
17. abu-zant a, jones s, asare r, suttles j, price c, graham j, kwaik ya (2007)
g (1998) j exp med 187:487–496.
3. schmid mc, scheidegger f, dehio m, balmelle-devaux n, schulein r, guye
p, chennakesava cs, biedermann b, dehio c (2006) plos pathog 2:e115.
4. bruggemann h, cazalet c, buchrieser c (2006) curr opin microbiol 9:86–94.
5. roy cr, tilney lg (2002) j cell biol 158:415–419.
6. nagai h, kagan jc, zhu x, kahn ra, roy cr (2002) science 295:679–682.
7. machner mp, isberg rr (2006) dev cell 11:47–56.
8. murata t, delprato a, ingmundson a, toomre dk, lambright dg, roy cr
(2006) nat cell biol 8:971–977.
9. dorer ms, kirton d, bader js, isberg rr (2006) plos pathog 2:e34.
10. fortier a, diez e, gros p (2005) trends microbiol 13:328–335.
11. zamboni ds, kobayashi ks, kohlsdorf t, ogura y, long em, vance re,
kuida k, mariathasan s, dixit vm, flavell ra, et al. (2006) nat immunol
7:318–325.
12. ren t, zamboni ds, roy cr, dietrich wf, vance re (2006) plos pathog
2:e18.
13. molofsky ab, byrne bg, whitfield nn, madigan ca, fuse et, tateda k,
swanson ms (2006) j exp med 203:1093–1104.
14. molmeret m, zink sd, han l, abu-zant a, asari r, bitar dm, abu kwaik
y (2004) cell microbiol 6:33–48.
18. losick vp, isberg rr (2006) j exp med 203:2177–2189.
19. laguna rk, creasey ea, li z, valtz n, isberg rr (2006) proc natl acad sci
usa 103:18745–18750.
20. luo zq, isberg rr (2004) proc natl acad sci usa 101:841–846.
21. kataoka t, holler n, micheau o, martinon f, tinel a, hofmann k, tschopp
j (2001) j biol chem 276:19548–19554.
22. boyd jm, malstrom s, subramanian t, venkatesh lk, schaeper u, elangovan
b, d’sa-eipper c, chinnadurai g (1994) cell 79:341–351.
23. vande velde c, cizeau j, dubik d, alimonti j, brown t, israels s, hakem r,
greenberg ah (2000) mol cell biol 20:5454–5468.
24. gross a, mcdonnell jm, korsmeyer sj (1999) genes dev 13:1899–1911.
25. dong f, pirbhai m, xiao y, zhong y, wu y, zhong g (2005) infect immun
73:1861–1864.
26. ray r, chen g, vande velde c, cizeau j, park jh, reed jc, gietz rd,
greenberg ah (2000) j biol chem 275:1439–1448.
27. cianciotto np, fields bs (1992) proc natl acad sci usa 89:5188–5191.
28. nakajima k, hirose h, taniguchi m, kurashina h, arasaki k, nagahama m,
tani k, yamamoto a, tagaya m (2004) embo j 23:3216–3226.
29. berger kh, isberg rr (1993) mol microbiol 7:7–19.
30. james p, halladay j, craig ea (1996) genetics 144:1425–1436.
31. tilney lg, harb os, connelly ps, robinson cg, roy cr (2001) j cell sci
15. derre i, isberg rr (2004) infect immun 72:6221–6229.
16. abu-zant a, santic m, molmeret m, jones s, helbig j, abu kwaik y (2005)
114:4637–4650.
infect immun 73:5339–5349.
32. conover gm, derre i, vogel jp, isberg rr (2003) mol microbiol 48:305–321.
5126 兩 www.pnas.org兾cgi兾doi兾10.1073兾pnas.0611030104
banga et al.