blackwell science, ltdoxford, uknanneuropathology and applied neurobiology0305-1846blackwell publishing ltd, 2005
323253259
original article
autophagic vacuolar myopathyj. l. holton 
et al.
neuropathology and applied neurobiology 
(2006), 
32
, 253–259
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2990.2006.00691.x
autophagic vacuolar myopathy in twin girls
j. l. holton*, c. beesley†, m. jackson‡, k. venner*, n. bhardwaj*, b. winchester† and a. al-memar§
*department of  molecular neuroscience and division of  neuropathology, institute of  neurology, university college london, 
†biochemistry, endocrinology & metabolism unit, institute of  child health, university college london, ‡chemical 
pathology, great ormond street hospital for children nhs trust, and §department of  neurology, atkinson morley’s 
hospital, london, uk
j. l. holton, c. beesley, m. jackson, k. venner, n. bhardwaj, b. winchester and a. al-memar (2006) 
and applied neurobiology
autophagic vacuolar myopathy in twin girls
 253–259
32,
neuropathology 
hereditary  autophagic  vacuolar  myopathy  (avm)  may
occur in several diseases including the rimmed vacuolar
myopathies, acid maltase deﬁciency, danon disease, infan-
tile autophagic vacuolar myopathy and x-linked myopa-
thy with excessive autophagy (xmea). in the latter three
conditions  the  vacuoles  are  lined  by  membranes  with
sarcolemmal  features.  we  present  two  unusual  cases  of
autophagic vacuolar myopathy in twin girls born at term
with no family history of  neurological disease. after initial
normal developmental milestones they developed progres-
sive leg weakness and wasting with contractures from the
age of  12 years. investigations showed raised ck, normal
female  karyotype,  normal  acid  maltase  activity,  normal
nerve  conduction  and  myopathic  emg  features.  frozen
sections of  skeletal muscle were stained using routine tinc-
torial and histochemical methods. immunohistochemical
staining  for  spectrin,  merosin,  dystrophin,  complement
membrane  attack  complex  and  sarcoglycans  was  per-
formed  and  ultrastructural  examination  undertaken.
lamp-2
direct sequence analysis of  the 
 gene using genomic
dna  extracted  from  lymphocytes  was  performed.  histo-
logical analysis of  the muscle biopsies demonstrated myo-
ﬁbres  with  vacuoles  lacking  glycogen  and  lipid  many  of
which  were  delineated  using  immunohistochemistry  for
merosin,  dystrophin  and  sarcoglycans.  ultrastructural
examination  showed  duplication  of   the  myoﬁbre  basal
lamina  with  associated  autophagic  material.  vacuoles
within myoﬁbres were either membrane bound contain-
ing  autophagic  material  or  lined  by  plasma  membrane
and  basal 
intermyoﬁbrillar  glycogen  was
increased.  sequence  analysis  of   the  coding  region  and
intron/exon boundaries of  the 
 gene was normal.
this  is  the  ﬁrst  report  of   female  cases  of   avm  with  sar-
colemmal  features.  we  suggest  that  these  patients  may
represent manifesting carriers of  xmea, or alternatively, a
new form of  disease with a similar phenotype having auto-
somal recessive inheritance.
lamina. 
lamp-2
keywords: danon disease, muscle biopsy, ultrastructure, autophagic vacuolar myopathy, x-linked myopathy with exces-
sive autophagy.
introduction
the  inherited  autophagic  vacuolar  myopathies  (avms)
include a number of  diseases and may be divided into three
correspondence: j. l. holton, division of  neuropathology, institute of
neurology,  queen  square,  london  wc1n 3bg,  uk.  tel:
44 0207 837 3611  ext  4239;  fax: 
44 0207 916 9546;  e-mail:
j.holton@ion.ucl.ac.uk
© 2006 blackwell publishing ltd
groups. in the group of  rimmed vacuolar myopathies that
includes  hereditary  inclusion  body  myopathy,  desmin
myopathy, and occulopharyngeal muscular dystrophy the
molecular defects identiﬁed to date involve non-lysosomal
proteins, and they can therefore be regarded as secondary
lysosomal myopathies (for review see [1]). glycogen stor-
age disease type ii was the ﬁrst primary lysosomal myop-
athy to be recognized and is associated with deﬁciency of
the lysosomal enzyme acid maltase. muscle biopsy shows
253
254
j. l. holton 
et al.
increased accumulation of  glycogen which on ultrastruc-
tural  examination  is  found  both  within  and  outside  of
membrane-bound vacuoles [2]. the third group of  avms
is characterized by autophagic vacuoles in which the vac-
uolar membranes have sarcolemmal features and is con-
sidered  to  include  four  entities:  danon  disease,  x-linked
myopathy  with  excessive  autophagy  (xmea),  infantile
avm and adult onset avm with multiorgan involvement
[3].
in 1981 two patients were described with cardiomyop-
athy,  myopathy  and  mental  retardation  in  whom  avm
was  associated  with  normal  acid  maltase  activity.  this
condition  is  now  known  as  danon  disease  or  lysosomal
glycogen storage with normal acid maltase [4]. it has sub-
sequently been recognized that excess glycogen accumu-
lation  is  not  always  a  feature.  the  vacuoles  in  danon
disease are of  two types, lysosomal membrane-bound vac-
uoles  and  those  which  are  formed  by  complex  indenta-
tions  of   the  sarcolemma  and  are  thus  lined  by  plasma
membrane and basal lamina. this second type of  vacuole
can be demonstrated using immunohistochemistry to be
delineated by dystrophin, dystrophin-associated proteins,
collagen  type  iv  and  laminin  [5].  vacuoles  can  also  be
identiﬁed by their histochemical reactivity for acetylcho-
linesterase  and  non-speciﬁc  esterase  [6].  danon  disease
has  been  shown  to  be  associated  with  mutations  in  the
 gene located on the x chromosome and encoding a
lamp-2
lysosomal membrane structural protein (lamp-2) which
has reduced expression in danon disease [7].
x-linked myopathy with excessive autophagy was ﬁrst
reported  in  a  finnish  family  in  which  males  presented
with a progressive myopathy but without associated car-
diomyopathy  or  mental  retardation.  ultrastructural
examination of  skeletal muscle shows two types of  vacu-
oles with features as described in danon disease in addi-
tion  to  multiple  layers  of   basal  lamina  associated  with
autophagic material [8]. a further feature of  this condi-
tion  is  the  deposition  of   complement  membrane  attack
complex at the periphery of  muscle ﬁbres [9]. linkage to
xq28  has  been  demonstrated  although  the  gene  associ-
ated with this disease has not been identiﬁed [10–13].
a small number of  cases of  infantile avm with normal
acid  maltase  activity  occurring  in  males  has  been
reported. the  pathological  features  are  similar  to  xmea
but  the  clinical  features  are  more  severe,  include  cardi-
omyopathy and death occurs in infancy [14–16]. a single
case  report  describes  an  adult  onset  form  of   avm  with
involvement of  multiple organs occurring in a man. the
pathological features in skeletal muscle included vacuoles
lined by membranes with sarcolemmal features and there
was  no  evidence  of   lamp-2  deﬁciency  [17]. the  major
clinical  and  pathological  features  of   danon  disease,
xmea, infantile avm and adult onset avm with multior-
gan involvement are compared in table 1.
table 1.
features of  avm with vacuoles lined by membranes with sarcolemmal features
clinical features
danon disease
xmea
myopathy
cardiomyopathy
mental retardation
myopathy
infantile avm
myopathy
cardiomyopathy
death in infancy
pathological 
features of  
skeletal muscle
vacuoles:
a. stained for laminin,
spectrin & 
dystrophin 
b. membrane bound
vacuoles:
a. stained for laminin,
spectrin & dystrophin
b. membrane bound
complement membrane
attack complex present
duplication of  basal lamina
and autophagic material
vacuoles:
a. stained for laminin, 
spectrin & dystrophin 
b. membrane bound
complement membrane 
attack complex present
duplication of  basal lamina
and autophagic material
adult onset avm with 
multi-organ involvement
myopathy
cardiomyopathy
retinal pigmentary
degeneration
abnormal liver function
exertional dyspnoea
proteinuria
vacuoles:
a. stained for laminin, 
spectrin & dystrophin 
complement membrane
attack complex present
inheritance
gene
x-linked
lamp-2
x-linked
xq28
? x-linked
avm, autophagic vacuolar myopathy; xmea, x-linked myopathy with excessive autophagy; ?, uncertain or unknown.
© 2006 blackwell publishing ltd, 
neuropathology and applied neurobiology, 
32
, 253–259
case reports
twin  girls  were  born  at  term.  their  parents  were  ﬁrst
cousins and there was no family history of  neurological
disease. both girls had normal developmental milestones,
normal iq and were well until the age of  12 years when
they  noted  difﬁculty  in  walking  with  some  reduction  in
movement of  the feet. they had progressive leg weakness
and  by  the  age  of   17 years  they  were  both  wheelchair
bound.
examination revealed severe wasting of  the thigh mus-
culature, mild calf  wasting and knee contractures. tendon
reﬂexes in the lower limbs were absent due to muscle wast-
ing and plantar responses were ﬂexor. there was weakness
of  neck ﬂexion, shoulder abduction, hip ﬂexion, hip exten-
sion,  ankle  dorsi-ﬂexion  and  ankle  plantar-ﬂexion  (all
4/5). weakness of  knee ﬂexion and extension was more
marked (3/5). sensory examination was normal.
/l, normal range for females: 26–140 i
the results of  investigations included a raised ck (500–
700 i
/l). skeletal
muscle acid maltase activity was within the normal range
(1.2  and  2.2 
mol/min/g  in  twins  1  and  2,  respectively,
normal  range:  1.0–4.0 
mol/min/g).  electromyography
showed evidence of  severe myopathic change in the prox-
imal lower limbs. nerve conduction studies were normal.
mri of  the legs revealed severe atrophy of  the thighs with
sparing of  the adductor muscles, while the calves were less
severely affected. echocardiography showed no evidence
of  cardiomyopathy. standard karyotypic analysis demon-
strated a normal female karyotype.
materials and methods
each patient underwent vastus lateralis biopsy and a sam-
ple of  skeletal muscle was ﬂash frozen. sections that were
8-
m  thick  were  cut  on  a  cryostat  (bright)  and  stained
using haematoxylin and eosin (h&e), gomori’s trichrome
method, periodic acid-schiff  (pas) and sudan black using
routine protocols. enzyme histochemical preparations for
succinic  dehydrogenase,  cytochrome  oxidase,  nicotina-
mide  adenine  dinucleotide  dehydrogenase-tetrazolium
redutase 
triphosphatase  at
ph 4.2,  4.3  and  9.4,  phosphorylase,  acid  phosphatase,
non-speciﬁc  esterase  and  myoadenylate  deaminase  were
made  using  routine  methods.  immunohistochemical
staining for spectrin (1 : 100, novocastra, newcastle, uk),
merosin (1:100, novocastra), dystrophin (dys 1, 1 : 5; dys
2,  1 : 40;  dys  3,  1 : 40,  all  novocastra),  complement
(nadh-tr),  adenosine 
autophagic vacuolar myopathy
255
-sarcoglycan  (1 : 100,  novocastra)  and 
membrane  attack  complex  (1 : 50,  dako,  ely,  uk), 
sarcoglycan (1 : 100, novocastra), 
-sarcoglycan (1 : 400,
novocastra), 
sarcoglycan (1 : 50, novocastra) was performed using an
lsab 
 kit,  peroxidase  (dako)  and  visualized  using  the
chromogen di-aminobenzidine with mayer’s haematoxy-
lin counterstain.
a small sample of  muscle was ﬁxed in glutaraldehyde
and processed for electron microscopy using standard pro-
tocols. sections that were 70-nm thick were cut on an lkb
ultramicrotome,  mounted  on  copper  grids,  stained  with
uranyl  acetate  and  lead  citrate,  and  viewed  with  jeol
1200 ex electron microscope.
genomic  dna  was  extracted  from  lymphocytes  using
standard techniques. direct sequence analysis of  the 
lamp-
 gene was performed. each of  the 9 exons (including the
alternative exon 9b) and the intron/exon boundaries were
ampliﬁed  using  primers  previously  published  [7].  the
products  were  sequenced  in  the  forward  direction  using
big  dye  terminator  technology  (applied  biosystems,
foster  city,  usa)  and  analysed  on  an  abi  prism
  377
dna sequencer (applied biosystems).
tm
results
the ﬁndings from each patient were identical and will be
described together.
light microscopy
examination  of   h&e  stained  sections  showed  some
increased variation in ﬁbre size with ﬁbre diameters lying
in  the  range  30–120 
m  and  small  numbers  of   both
round atrophic ﬁbres and nuclear bag ﬁbres. endomysial
connective tissue was mildly increased. occasional inter-
nal nuclei were present and there were small numbers of
actively  regenerating  ﬁbres.  split  ﬁbres  were  noted.  sev-
eral ﬁbres contained small vacuoles associated with acid
phosphatase  and  non-speciﬁc  esterase  activity,  although
these  did  not  appear  to  contain  glycogen  or  lipid  in  pas
and  sudan  black  preparations  respectively  (figure 1).
there  was  no  evidence  of   necrosis  or  inﬂammation.  no
ragged  red  or  cytochrome  oxidase  negative  ﬁbres  were
observed and both succinic dehydrogenase and nadh-tr
preparations  showed  a  normal  pattern  of   staining.  his-
tochemical  staining  for  myophosphorylase  and  myoade-
nylate  deaminase  activity  showed  no  abnormality.  fibre
© 2006 blackwell publishing ltd, 
neuropathology and applied neurobiology, 
32
, 253–259
256
j. l. holton 
et al.
) and dystrophin (
figure 1.
esterase activity (
attack complex deposited at the periphery (arrows) (
represents 30 
 and 
 and 20 
m in 
m in 
e–h
, 
, 
frozen sections of  skeletal muscle showing small, indistinct vacuoles indicated by arrows (
). vacuoles sometimes have acid phosphatase activity (arrow) (
) and associated with non-speciﬁc 
), merosin 
, dystrophin 2 antibody) highlights split ﬁbres and small vacuoles (arrows). several ﬁbres have complement membrane 
). immunohistochemical staining for spectrin (
, acid phosphatase. bar in 
, non-speciﬁc esterase; 
, gomori trichrome; 
, h&e; 
 and 
). 
© 2006 blackwell publishing ltd, 
neuropathology and applied neurobiology, 
32
, 253–259
autophagic vacuolar myopathy
257
typing  showed  a  normal  distribution  of   ﬁbre  types. the
majority of  the atrophic ﬁbres were of  types iia and iib.
immunohistochemical  staining  for  spectrin,  merosin,
dystrophin and the sarcoglycans showed a normal pattern
of   staining  around  the  periphery  of   muscle  ﬁbres  and
highlighted  the  splits  in  ﬁbres.  in  addition,  many  of   the
vacuoles  were  also  delineated  using  these  antibodies.
complement membrane attack complex was deposited at
the margin of  some muscle ﬁbres and in association with a
proportion of  vacuoles (figure 1).
the second variety of  vacuole was less frequent, had a sim-
ilar content and was lined by plasma membrane and basal
lamina (figure 2). many of  the ﬁbres contained increased
amounts of  free glycogen.
dna analysis
following  sequencing  analysis  of   the  coding  region  and
intron/exon boundaries of  the 
 gene no sequence
changes were observed.
lamp-2
electron microscopy
discussion
ultrastructural  examination  showed  marked  reduplica-
tion  of   the  myoﬁbre  basal  lamina  of   most  ﬁbres  with
autophagic  material  composed  of   membranous  whorls
and granular material some of  which appeared to be min-
eralized, interspersed between the layers. vacuoles of  two
types were apparent, the ﬁrst type was most frequent, and
these  were  membrane  bound  and  contained  autophagic
material similar to that associated with the basal lamina.
these  two  female  patients  presented  with  a  progressive
myopathy  in  the  absence  of   cardiomyopathy  or  mental
retardation.  the  pathological  features  in  both  patients
were those of  a vacuolar myopathy in which many of  the
vacuoles  had  sarcolemmal  features  being  delineated  by
antibodies to spectrin, merosin, dystrophin and sarcogly-
cans. complement membrane attack complex was present
on the sarcolemma and in some vacuoles. ultrastructural
figure 2.
of  which appears to be mineralized (
plasma membrane and basal lamina (
). autophagic material is also contained within membrane-bound vacuoles (
 represents 1.2 
 and 0.8 
). bar in 
, 0.7 
m in 
m in 
m in 
 and 
ultrastrutural examination showed marked reduplication of  the basal lamina associated with autophagic material (
), some 
) and in vacuoles lined by 
 and 
© 2006 blackwell publishing ltd, 
neuropathology and applied neurobiology, 
32
, 253–259
258
j. l. holton 
et al.
examination showed marked duplication of  the myoﬁbre
basal 
lamina  associated  with  autophagic  material
together  with  membrane-bound  vacuoles  and  vacuoles
lined by plasma membrane and basal lamina containing
similar  autophagic  material.  intermyoﬁbrillar  glycogen
was increased. the absence of  any sequence changes in
the coding region and intron/exon boundaries of  the 
lamp-
 gene indicates that it is unlikely these ﬁndings are due to
danon disease. the vacuoles in glycogen storage disease
type ii may be lined by plasma membrane and basal lam-
ina as determined by immunohistochemical staining [18]
although in this condition vacuoles contain excessive gly-
cogen  which  was  not  found  to  be  the  case  in  the  two
patients that we present. furthermore, we have excluded
glycogen storage disease type ii by demonstrating normal
acid maltase activity in skeletal muscle samples from both
patients.
the pathological and clinical features described in the
two cases presented are consistent with those described in
xmea. to our knowledge no examples of  manifesting car-
riers of  this condition have been reported in the literature
although, an asymptomatic female carrier of  xmea with
similar pathological ﬁndings in a small number of  myoﬁ-
bres has been described [19]. the patients we describe rep-
resent the ﬁrst reported cases of  avm with sarcolemmal
features occurring in females. as the patients were found
to have a normal female karyotype, it is unlikely that dis-
ease has arisen as a consequence of  an x-autosome trans-
location with a breakpoint affecting the location of  xmea
locus at xq28 although minor gene rearrangements can-
not be excluded. we suggest that these two females repre-
sent either manifesting carriers of  xmea or that they are
examples  of   a  novel  autosomal  recessive  condition  with
similar clinical and pathological features.
references
1 nishino i. autophagic vacuolar myopathies. 
curr neurol
neurosci rep
 2003; 
: 64–9
2 engel ag, gomez mr, seybold me, lambert eh. the spec-
neurology
trum and diagnosis of  acid maltase deﬁciency. 
1973; 
: 95–106
23
3 nishino  i,  yamamoto  a,  sugie  k,  hirano  m,  nonaka  i.
acta  myologica
danon  disease  and  related  disorders. 
2001; 
: 120–4
20
4 danon mj, oh sj, dimauro s, manaligod jr, eastwood a,
naidu  s,  schliselfeld  lh.  lysosomal  glycogen  storage
31
disease  with  normal  acid  maltase. 
51–7
neurology
  1981; 
5 murakami n, goto y, itoh m, katsumi y, wada t, ozawa
e, nonaka i. sarcolemmal indentation in cardiomyopathy
with mental retardation and vacuolar myopathy. 
neuro-
muscul disord
: 149–55
 1995; 
6 sugie k, yamamoto a, murayama k, oh sj, takahashi m,
mora  m,  riggs  je,  colomer  j,  iturriaga  c,  meloni  a,
lamperti  c,  saitoh  s,  byrne  e,  dimauro  s,  nonaka  i,
hirano  m,  nishino  i.  clinicopathological  features  of
genetically  conﬁrmed  danon  disease. 
  2002;
58
neurology
: 1773–8
7 nishino i, fu j, tanji k, yamada t, shimojo s, koori t,
mora m, riggs je, oh sj, koga y, sue cm, yamamoto a,
murakami  n,  shanske  s,  byrne  e,  bonilla  e,  nonaka  i,
dimauro s, hirano m. primary lamp-2 deﬁciency causes
x-linked  vacuolar  cardiomyopathy  and  myopathy
(danon disease). 
: 906–10
 2000; 
nature
406
8 kalimo h, savontaus ml, lang h, paljarvi l, sonninen v,
dean  pb,  katevuo  k,  salminen  a.  x-linked  myopathy
with excessive autophagy: a new hereditary muscle dis-
ease. 
ann neurol
: 258–65
 1988; 
23
9 villanova m, louboutin jp, chateau d, eymard b, sagniez
m, tome fm, fardeau m. x-linked vacuolated myopathy:
complement membrane attack complex on surface mem-
37
brane  of   injured  muscle  ﬁbers. 
637–45
ann  neurol
  1995; 
10 auranen m, villanova m, muntoni f, fardeau m, scherer
sw, kalino h, minassian ba. x-linked vacuolar myopa-
thies: two separate loci and reﬁned genetic mapping. 
ann
neurol
: 666–9
 2000; 
47
11 minassian ba, aiyar r, alic s, banwell b, villanova m,
fardeau  m,  mandell  jw,  juel  vc,  raﬁi  m,  auranen  m,
kalimo  h.  narrowing  in  on  the  causative  defect  of   an
intriguing x-linked myopathy with excessive autophagy.
neurology
: 596–601
 2002; 
59
12 saviranta p, lindlof m, lehesjoki ae, kalimo h, lang h,
sonninen  v,  savontaus  ml,  de  la  chapelle  a.  linkage
studies in a new x-linked myopathy, suggesting exclusion
of  dmd locus and tentative assignment to distal xq. 
am j
hum genet
 1988; 
: 84–8
42
13 villard l, des portes v, levy n, louboutin jp, recan d,
coquet m, chabrol b, figarella-branger d, chelly j, pellis-
sier  jf,  fontes  m.  linkage  of   x-linked  myopathy  with
excessive  autophagy  (xmea)  to  xq28. 
eur  j  hum  genet
2000; 
: 125–9
14 morisawa y, fujieda m, murakami n, naruse k, okada t,
morita h, sawada k, miyazaki j, kurashige t, nonaka i.
lysosomal  glycogen  storage  disease  with  normal  acid
160
maltase with early fatal outcome. 
175–9
j neurol sci
 1998; 
15 verloes a, massin m, lombet j, grattagliano b, soyeur d,
rigo j, koulischer l, van hoof f. nosology of  lysosomal
glycogen  storage  diseases  without  in  vitro  acid  maltase
deﬁciency. delineation of  a neonatal form. 
am j med genet
1997; 
: 135–42
72
16 yamamoto  a,  morisawa  y,  verloes  a,  murakami  n,
hirano m, nonaka i, nishino i. infantile autophagic vac-
© 2006 blackwell publishing ltd, 
neuropathology and applied neurobiology, 
32
, 253–259
autophagic vacuolar myopathy
259
19 chabrol  b,  figarella-branger  d,  coquet  m,  mancini  j,
fontan d, pedespan jm, francannet c, pouget j, beaufr-
ere  am,  pellissier  jf.  x-linked  myopathy  with  excessive
autophagy: a clinicopathological study of  ﬁve new fami-
lies. 
neuromuscul disord
: 376–88
 2001; 
11
received 17 november 2004
accepted after revision 10 july 2005
uolar myopathy is distinct from danon disease. 
2001; 
: 903–5
57
neurology
17 kaneda d, sugie k, yamamoto a, matsumoto h, kato t,
nonaka i, nishino i. a novel form of  autophagic vacuolar
myopathy  with  late-onset  and  multiorgan  involvement.
neurology
: 128–31
 2003; 
61
18 de bleecker jl, engel ag, winkelmann jc. localization of
am
dystrophin and beta-spectrin in vacuolar myopathies. 
j pathol
: 1200–8
 1993; 
143
© 2006 blackwell publishing ltd, 
neuropathology and applied neurobiology, 
32
, 253–259