the journal ofexperimental medicine
jem
correspondence
george 5 yap
georgejap@bmwn 8th
brief definitive report
vacuolar and plasma membrane stripping
and autophagic elimination of toxoplasma
gondu 1n prlmed effector macrophages
yun m. ling,l michael h. shaw,1 carol ayala.2 isabelle coppens.3
gregory at'i‘aylor,4 david jp. ferguson,s and george styap1
depavtment cf mateemar mmmmogv and tmmunatogv. dwtstan mt amtogv and memcme. bvawn unwrvsw
prowdrntc, r\ 02912
zcare restarch tabaratanes. rhude mam haspuat prowdrncc, rt 02903
inepanmem cf mateemar mmmmogv and tmmunatogv. johns hupkms unwrvsttv senoot of pubhc hem,
bammovc, md 21205
"depavtment cf mememe, depavtmcnt ur mutecmar eeneucs & mmmmogv, drpartmcnt of \mmunu‘agy
and ccntrv far the study of agmg, duk: unwemy and grecc va meant semen durham. nc 27710
swumetd depanmem mt patnatogv, john radchf’fe huspttak 0mm unwrvstty 0mm 0x3 90m uk
apicomplexan protozoan pathogens avoid destruction and establish a replicative niche
within host cells by forming a nonfusagenic parasitophoruus vacuole (fv). here we present
evidence for lysosome—mediated degradation of toxoplasma gondii after invasion of macro—
phages activated in vivo. pathogen elimination was dependent on the interferon 'y induc—
ible—p47 gtpase, igtp, required pi3k activity, and was preceded by pv membrane indentation,
vesiculation, disruption, and, surprisingly, stripping of the parasite plasma membrane.
denuded parasites were enveloped in autophagosame—iike vacuoles. which ultimately fused
with lysosomes. these observations outline a series of mechanisms used by effector cells to
redirect the fate of a classically nonfusagenic intracellular pathogen toward a path of
immune elimination.
protozoan pamttes of phylum aplcmnplexa
(for examplc, plummtum, toxvp/mnm, emmm,
and ctypttupamltum) represent imponant hu-
man and vetmnany pathogem worldwtde (1,
2). apuomplezam atmely made hm cchr
and form pamsttophomm vauloleﬁ (11m),
which appear to be sccluded from the endo-
cytlt: and lymsomal uunpartmenls of the m-
t‘eaed l611 (3, 4). nevertheless, the pv appean
t0 prtmde an mlsrﬁlce through whtch the par-
2mm atqutrex nutnenm {mm the hmt cytmol
for growth and rcphcatmn and alters nmate tm-
muue slgnalmg (5, 6). the formation ufa nun-
{usogemc 11v hm been lensually \rlewed tn an
adaptive mechannm fur mtmccllular survwal
by apxcomplexan pans es, allowmg paraslte
cvtmon oflysosomal destructmu, the tmmune
rexpome to several apxcomplextun ts charactcr—
tzed by the development of th1 responsex 1n-
cludmg the seuctmn 0fifn—‘y and tnf-dt. in
the law of towtmm thmlii mfectnm, cell-an-
tonomous ifn-y “gnalmg ut'hemopmcttc and
tim m.tmt-
mm ”mm mutt- ttmmm \upplcuwuul umemt
jem s the ruckefehev umvevsuy prtss $300
vat mm a. swterrbemjooﬁ 200372071 wwmemmg/cgwm/mwomemxoosms
nunhemopmcuc lelk ts cnncal for 1mmumty
(7). although ifn—‘yimduced mechannms
(e.gw n0 gcncratmn by type ii nos [8] and
uypmphan dcgmdalltm by [dd [9]) rutnctmg
pmme growth have been dewnbed, whether
cytukme-amvatcd cchr can dlrcctly dextmy
taxuplmnm tathyzmtes mmun uncertain. in
thxs <tudy, we invesllgated the fate of tachyzo-
m mvadmg m vlvtkpnmcd macrophages.
our m-depth analyns rcvealed a mwet and
sophmtcated <enc< of muacellular mechamsms
med by macrophage effector cells to dextmy
mmfusogemc mtmccllular panasttes,
results and discussion
we destgned an expenmental <y<tem usmg
nnce pnmed wtth a tmul-auxotmphtc car-
bamoyl phosphate synthasc null (cps) mm
(fig. 51 a, avatlable at http://www.jemmg/cgt/
cuntent/ﬁlll/jeml!)061318/dc , refercnce 10)
that allowed us to tmce the fate ufgf1’-labeled
tgtvtxtlti after entry mm ifn-‘yﬁldlvﬂlcd host cells
m v1vo.at day 7 after pnmmg, when pentoneal
(elk exprexs the ifn-‘yimduublc gtp‘me
zusa
 attenuated,  resulting  in  death  of  gfp-ptg–challenged 
igtp−/− mice despite priming (fig. 1 b).
to  avoid  limitations  of  the  in  vivo  priming  challenge 
model, we infected primed peritoneal exudate cells (pecs) 
ex vivo. primed wt macrophages still cleared gfp-ptg ef-
fi ciently ex vivo, whereas igtp−/− cells failed to do so (fig. 
1 c). the decrease of gfp positivity determined by fl ow cy-
tometry refl ected a reduction of infection rate observed di-
rectly  by  fl uorescence  microscopy  and  correlated  with 
decreased  plaque-forming  effi  ciency  (fig.  s2,  available  at 
http://www.jem.org/cgi/content/full/jem.20061318/dc1), 
indicating  that  primed  macrophages  eliminate  rather  than 
simply inhibit t. gondii. the microbicidal activity of primed 
macrophages is clearly igtp dependent, confi rmed by data 
(fig. s3) showing that igtp acts cell autonomously to eff ect 
parasite  clearance.  however,  igtp  induction  alone  is  not 
suffi  cient for parasite elimination given that igtp-expressing 
thioglycollate-elicited  macrophages  pretreated  with  ifn-γ 
in vitro were ineff ectual (fig. 1 d), suggesting that in vivo 
priming involves additional undefi ned accessory signals.
earlier in vitro studies of the anti-toxoplasma activity of 
macrophages indicated a critical role of inducible nitric oxide 
synthase (inos; reference 8). nevertheless, inos-defi cient 
(inos−/−) mice were capable of resisting acute t. gondii in-
fection (13). to clarify the role of inos in the igtp-depen-
dent parasite elimination, we included primed inos−/− and 
igtp−/−inos−/− cells in the experiment shown in fig. 1 e. 
inos−/− macrophages cleared the parasites as effi  ciently as 
wt cells, if not better, indicating that inos is not required 
for  the  igtp-dependent  parasite  elimination.  we  can  also 
exclude antibody-mediated phagocytosis, as μmt mice also 
cleared  the  parasite  effi  ciently  (fig.  s4,  available  at  http://
www.jem.org/cgi/content/full/jem.20061318/dc1).
the nonfusogenic nature of the t. gondii pv was revealed 
using macrophages or other cell types without prior immune 
activation  (4,  14).  given  that  primed  macrophages  rapidly 
eliminate invaded gfp-ptg, we wondered whether t. gon-
dii can fuse with lysosomes in this system. we probed adher-
ent pecs from primed mice infected with gfp-ptg in vivo 
for  lamp1.  at  4  h  after  infection,  a  larger  percentage  of 
gfp-ptg colocalized with lamp1 staining in primed wt 
than in primed igtp−/− cells (fig. 2, a and b, and videos 
s1 and s2, which are available at http://www.jem.org/cgi/
content/full/jem.20061318/dc1). lamp1-associated para-
sites appeared to have weakened gfp intensity, probably a 
result of acidifi cation-induced fl uorescence quenching (15). 
using a second method to label lysosomes, adherent pecs 
were  pulsed  with  texas  red–labeled  dextran  before  gfp-
ptg  infection  ex  vivo.  we  consistently  observed  higher 
rates  of  fusion  between  texas  red–labeled  lysosomes  and 
gfp-ptg  in  primed  wt  macrophages  than  in  igtp−/− 
cells (fig. 2, c and d, and fig. s5). to formally demonstrate 
the role of lysosomal fusion in parasite elimination, we used 
bafi lomycin a1 to inhibit lysosomal acidifi cation. bafi lomy-
cin  a1  treatment  attenuated  the  parasite  elimination  in 
igtp-dependent rapid t. gondii elimination in primed 
figure 1. 
macrophages. (a) impaired t. gondii elimination in primed igtp−/− mice. 
cps-primed (day 7 after infection) wt and igtp−/− mice were challenged 
with 4 × 106 gfp-ptg i.p. infection rates (mean ± sem) in peritoneal 
macrophages were determined by facs (n = 3). (b) survival of primed 
wt (n = 6) and igtp−/− (n = 4) mice after gfp-ptg challenge. (c) infec-
tion rates in primed wt and igtp−/− peritoneal macrophages after gfp-
ptg infection (moi of 1, 15 min) ex vivo. data shown are representative 
of eight experiments. (d) thioglycolate-elicited wt and igtp−/− perito-
neal macrophages failed to eliminate t. gondii after gfp-ptg infection 
(moi of 1, 15 min) when activated in vitro. ifn-γ treatment (1 ng/ml) 
started 12 h before infection. (e) igtp-dependent rapid t. gondii elimi-
nation in primed macrophages does not require inos. primed (wt, igtp−/−, 
inos−/−, and igtp−/−inos−/−) and naive wt (thioglycolate-elicited) 
pecs were infected with gfp-ptg ex vivo. data are representative of 
three experiments.
igtp  (fig.  s1  b),  we  challenged  the  mice  i.p.  with  gfp-
ptg, a low-virulence type ii strain of t. gondii, and moni-
tored infection rate in peritoneal macrophages  (large, granular 
cells  that  are  mostly  cd11b+f4/80+),  considered  the  pri-
mary eff ector cells against t. gondii (11). infection in primed 
wt macrophages decreased rapidly, and by 24 h after chal-
lenge, few infected cells could be detected (fig. 1 a). in mice, 
acute resistance to t. gondii infection is igtp dependent (12). 
we  therefore  tested  the  ability  of  primed  igtp-defi cient 
(igtp−/−) mice to clear gfp-ptg. as shown in fig. 1 a, 
the decrease in infection rate in igtp−/− mice was highly 
2064 
how do activated macrophages eliminate toxoplasma? | ling et al. 
brief definitive report
figure 2.  evidence for lysosomal fusion with t. gondii in primed 
macrophages. (a) t. gondii reside in lamp1+ compartments in primed 
macrophages. primed mice were challenged with 4 × 106 gfp-ptg i.p. 
adherent pecs were stained for lamp1. green, gfp-ptg; red, lamp1; 
blue, dapi. in a and c, arrow heads point to lysosome-associated t. gondii 
with decreased gfp fl uorescence. (b) quantifi cation of fusion events in 
the experiment depicted in a. percentage of lamp1+ t. gondii vacuoles 
(mean ± sem) was determined by counting 20–30 t. gondii–containing 
vacuoles per sample (n = 3 mice per group). (c) t. gondii fuse with dex-
tran-labeled lysosomes in primed macrophages. green, gfp-ptg; red, 
dextran; blue, dapi. (d) quantifi cation of fusion events in experiments 
depicted in c. percentage of texas red–positive t. gondii vacuoles was 
shown (the number above the bar shows the total number of t. gondii–
containing vacuoles counted). (e) bafi lomycin a1 (baf a1) treatment 
(100 nm) attenuated rapid parasite elimination in primed wt macrophages. 
data are representative of three experiments.
primed wt macrophages (fig. 2 e), suggesting a role for ly-
sosomal fusion in parasite attrition.
to visualize intracellular events leading to t. gondii de-
struction, we examined the fi ne structures of the parasites and 
associated  host  membranes  by  electron  microscopy  (em). 
we pulsed naive and primed macrophages with bsa-gold 
(6 nm) and chased for 3 h to label lysosomes before a 15-min 
pulse infection. 15 nm bsa-gold was present during the in-
fection to distinguish between actively invaded and phagocy-
tosed parasites. samples were prepared for em analysis at 1, 
2, and 4 h after infection. consistent with a nonphagocytic 
mode  of  entry,  shortly  after  infection,  the  majority  of  the 
parasites  in  both  primed  wt  and  igtp−/−  macrophages 
were  found  within  15  nm  of  gold-negative  pvs  associated 
with host er and mitochondria. we observed a markedly 
higher  frequency  of  parasite  degeneration  in  primed  wt 
macrophages than in primed igtp−/− and naive cells (fig. 
s6, a–c, available at http://www.jem.org/cgi/content/full/
jem.20061318/dc1).  although  heterogeneity  in  the  em 
profi les within each sample was noted, contrasting features of 
parasite–host  cell  interface  were  clearly  observed  between 
primed wt and igtp−/− macrophages. after careful analy-
sis  of  distinct  aberrations  in  the  parasite  vacuolar  structure 
observed in primed wt  macrophages, here we propose a 
series of events involving pv membrane (pvm) indentation, 
pvm vesiculation/disruption, and parasite plasma membrane 
jem vol. 203, september 4, 2006 
2065
figure 3.  ultrastructural alterations of t. gondii pvm and plasma 
membrane in primed wt macrophages. (a) t. gondii pvm indentation 
(phase i) in a primed wt macrophage. (b) spacious pv in a primed igtp−/− 
macrophage. (c) normal pv in a thioglycolate-elicited peritoneal macro-
phage. (d–k) images of t. gondii in primed wt macrophages. (d–f) pvm 
vesiculation and disruption (phase ii). irregular pvm forms cuplike projec-
tions in d. er is no longer associated with pvm undergoing vesiculation 
in e. pvm disintegrates into vesicles and tubules radiating away from the 
parasite in f. (g and h) naked parasites in direct contact with host cytosol 
after pvm dissolution. note electron-dense t. gondii plasmalemma in h. 
(i and j) parasite membrane stripping (phase iii). note that the electron-
dense plasmalemma has been severed, exposing the  inner membrane 
2066 
how do activated macrophages eliminate toxoplasma? | ling et al. 
brief definitive report
stripping (phase i, ii, and iii, respectively), which ultimately 
lead to lysosomal degradation (phase iv) of the parasite.
phase i is characterized by the formation of tight-fi tting 
parasite vacuoles in primed wt macrophages (fig. 3 a), un-
like  the  normally  spacious  t.  gondii  vacuoles  observed  in 
primed  igtp−/−  (fig.  3  b)  and  naive  cells  (fig.  3  c). 
tachyzoites in phase i pvs appeared intact, but little tubulo-
vesicular network formation was observed in the pv lumen. 
pvms  in  these  tight  vacuoles  presented  an  undulating  and 
corrugated  profi le,  with  inward  protuberances  measuring 
23–60 nm in height, and seemed to closely contact the sur-
face of the parasite more than 10–70% of the circumference 
of the pv (fig. 3 a and fig. s7, which is available at http://
www.jem.org/cgi/content/full/jem.20061318/dc1). pvm 
indentation toward the parasite may allow for pathogen rec-
ognition that initiates signals leading to subsequent pvm re-
modeling.  indeed,  we  obtained  multiple  images  showing 
various degrees of pvm vesiculation, but only in primed wt 
macrophages. in earlier stages of phase ii, the previously cor-
rugated pvm presented a jagged and irregular profi le, with 
subsequent formation of cuplike outward projections of the 
pvm (fig. 3 d). initiation of the vesiculation process was as-
sociated with a dispersal of the er that typically underlies the 
pvm (fig. 3 e). at later stages of phase ii, when extensive 
vesiculation was observed, the pvm disintegrated into vesi-
cles and elongated tubules radiating away from the parasite 
(fig.  3  f).  pvm  dissolution  resulted  in  the  appearance  of 
 naked parasites in direct contact with the host cytosol (fig. 3 
g). at this stage, the parasite membrane seemed to be intact, 
with  a  continuous  electron-dense  plasmalemma  and  the 
 characteristic double-layered inner cell membrane complex 
(fig. 3 h). in phase iii, detachment of the parasite plasma-
lemma was evident (fig. 3, i–k). even more surprisingly, we 
obtained  pictures  clearly  indicating  that  the  parasite  outer 
membrane has been severed and folded (fig. 3, i and j). it 
appeared  that  the  coated  plasmalemma  stripped  from  the 
 parasite  can  form  more  complex  stacks  held  together  by 
 electron-dense bridging structures (fig. 3 k and fig. s8).
phase i, ii, and iii profi les in primed wt macrophages 
were  frequent  at  1  and  2  h  after  infection,  and  less  so  at 
4 h, indicating that pvm disruption and parasite denuda-
tion happens early and proceeds rapidly. overall, the above 
events  were  rarely  observed  in  naive  macrophages  and 
primed igtp−/− cells. of more than 100 t. gondii sections 
examined  in  primed  igtp−/−  macrophages,  we  found 
only one phase iii–denuded parasite (vs. 15–20% in primed 
wt cells), suggesting that igtp could play an active role 
in  the  denudation  process.  however,  the  machinery  that 
mediates plasmalemma severing and stripping in phase iii 
remains enigmatic.
our ultrastructural analysis of the fate of t. gondii within 
primed macrophages provides a clear picture of how an ac-
tivated  macrophage  aggressively  disrupts  the  intracellular 
niche, which the parasite attempts but fails to establish. in a 
study of t. gondii infection of in vitro ifn-γ–activated as-
trocytes, martens et al. (16) recently reported similar vesicu-
lation  and  disruption  of  the  pvm.  however,  how  the 
parasite  was  eventually  eliminated  remained  unclear  be-
cause, unlike our results obtained in primed macrophages, 
no  evidence  for  lysosomal  fusion  with  t.  gondii  was  ob-
served in astrocytes.
we considered autophagy as the likely mechanism lead-
ing to the lysosomal destruction of the denuded parasites dur-
ing phase iv. although autophagy is normally considered a 
homeostatic cellular response to stress and starvation (17), re-
cent reports have documented an emerging link between au-
tophagy  and  antimicrobial  defense  (18–20).  to  probe  the 
involvement of autophagy, we used inhibitors of pi3k func-
tion, which is required for autophagosome formation (21). 
as  shown  in  fig.  4  a,  the  addition  of  three  distinct  pi3k 
 inhibitors  (wortmannin,  ly294002,  and  3-methyladenine) 
uniformly  attenuated  igtp-dependent  parasite  elimination 
in primed eff ector cells, suggesting the involvement of an au-
tophagy-like response against the parasite. autophagic vacu-
oles are characteristically double membrane structures, which 
retain  the  fl uorescent  dye,  monodansylcadaverine  (mdc; 
reference 22). indeed, we found extensive colocalization of 
gfp-ptg with mdc in primed wt macrophages and to a 
lesser extent in primed igtp−/− cells (fig. 4 b). defi nitive 
evidence indicating autophagosome formation is provided by 
the em images shown in fig. 4 (c and d) and fig. s9 (a–c), 
which is available at http://www.jem.org/cgi/content/full/
jem.20061318/dc1. multiple autophagosome-like vacuoles 
surrounding  entire  parasites  together  with  associated  host 
 cytosolic material were found in primed wt macrophages. 
autophagosomes  contained  only  parasites  with  disrupted 
plasma  membrane,  suggesting  that  leakage  of  internal  anti-
gens of the parasite may provide signals for autophagy induc-
tion. fusion of fl attened elongated vesicles appeared to give 
rise to double membrane structures characteristic of autopha-
gosomes (fig. 4 e; reference 23), which can ultimately fuse 
with lysosomes. indeed, consistent with fig. 2, we observed 
fusion of bsa-gold–labeled lysosomes with toxoplasma-con-
taining autophagic vacuoles (fig. 4, f and g, and fig. s10), 
indicating the involvement of an autophagic mechanism that 
leads to lysosome-mediated destruction of the parasite. esti-
mation of the rate of lysosomal fusion with parasite-contain-
ing  vacuoles  using  bsa-gold  labeling  showed  that  igtp 
defi ciency decreased the frequency of such events by ⵑ2–10-
fold (fig. 4 h).
complex to host cytosol. severed plasmalemma can fold onto itself, form-
ing membrane double layers or whorls (j). (k) detached parasite plasma 
membrane forming complex stacks. note layers of detached plasma-
lemma held together by electron-dense bridging structures magnifi ed in 
inset. t.g., t. gondii; black arrows, pvm; white arrows, pv-associated er; 
black arrow heads, t. gondii plasma membrane; white arrow heads, 
t. gondii inner membrane complex; bars, 500 nm.
jem vol. 203, september 4, 2006 
2067
figure 4.  autophagic elimination of t. gondii in primed macro-
phages. (a) pi3k inhibitors (100 nm wortmannin, 100 μm ly294002, and 
10 mm 3-ma 30 min before and after gfp-ptg infection) attenuated 
rapid parasite elimination in primed wt macrophages. (b) colocalization 
of gfp-ptg (green) with mdc (blue) staining in primed wt macrophages 
at 2 h after infection. (c and d) autophagosome formation in primed wt 
macrophages. arrows point to the autophagosome outer membrane. note 
the space between the outer and inner membranes and the denuded 
t. gondii with part of host cytoplasm (cyt) within autophagosomes. 
(d) autophagosome formation around a partially denuded parasite. 
note detachment and folding of the electron-dense plasmalemma (arrow 
heads). (e) fusion of fl attened vesicles (arrows) giving rise to double 
membrane autophagosomes. (f) fusion of lysosomes with t. gondii–
 containing autophagic vacuoles. arrows point to lysosomes containing 
6-nm gold particles. (g) high magnifi cation of the fusion event shown in f. 
(h) em quantifi cation of lysosomal fusion with t. gondii. (i) proposed 
phases of t. gondii elimination in primed macrophages. black, t. gondii 
plasmalemma; gray, t. gondii inner membrane complex; blue, pvm; ma-
genta, er; green, autophagosome inner membrane; red, autophagosome 
outer membrane; gray vesicles, lysosomes; bars, 500 nm.
the pleitropic eff ect of igtp defi ciency on the killing 
activity of primed macrophages raises the question of when 
igtp participates in the steps of pvm indentation, vesicula-
tion and disruption, and parasite plasma membrane stripping. 
the p47 gtpase, iigp, has been localized by immunofl uo-
rescence microscopy to the pv in astrocytes (16), but whether 
igtp is also found in the pv remains controversial (24). we 
therefore  performed  cryo-  immunoelectron  microscopy  to 
visualize  igtp  localization  within  primed  and  t.  gondii–
 infected  wt  macrophages.  using  igtp-defi cient  macro-
phages as negative controls, clustered igtp-specifi c labeling 
adjacent  to  the  parasite  was  observed  (fig.  5  a),  showing 
that igtp is positioned to take part in some of the above-
mentioned  membrane-disruptive  events.  strikingly,  igtp 
immunostaining was also focally associated with autophago-
some-like structures containing denuded t. gondii (fig. 5 b), 
suggesting  igtp’s  role  in  autophagosome  formation  or 
 maintenance (25).
unlike mycobacteria and salmonella, which establish vacu-
olar niches along the endo-lysosomal route,  apicomplexan 
parasites  present  special  challenges  to  eff ector  cells  in  their 
apparent seclusion from lysosome fusion. the series of events 
2068 
how do activated macrophages eliminate toxoplasma? | ling et al. 
figure 5. localilztion of igtp in t. guild: femd primed w‘r
macrophages. ia) igtp \mmunoreactwutv (15mm gold, highlighted by
arrows] m ehrsters adjacent to parashe nganmn. (b) igtp rmmunoreace
tlwty (hlghhgmed by arrows] assonated wwth the periphery ofzn sue
mphagosomeehke proﬁle, whh the characteristic cvcumferentua‘
dearance around the denuded palasli9(igdhdl/1.ahow head pmpolnts
stripped parashe p‘asmalemmz, smear to one shown m fig. 4 c.
we have descnbed here oulee a prevmusly unrecogmzed
and mechanmucally distinct solution to the problem posed by
nonfusogemc intracellular pathogem (fig. 4 i). it remains un-
clear why autophagosome formauon around t. gondii and
lysosome fusion wnh [he parasne were not observed 111 resid-
ual parasites after pvm disruption m astrocytes (16). thu dm-
panry may ame xlmply ﬂ'om methodologmal differences (1n
vmo acuvauon of cultured amoeytes vs. 111 v1vo pummg of
inﬂammatory macrophages) or may be a [me reﬂection cfm-
nate djherences 1n lhe defense arsenal ofparenchymal (amo—
eyre) versus profesxlonal effector cells (macrophages). a
related question yet to be resolved m whether [he autopla-
jem vul 203.5ep1embevo, zoos
brief definitive report
golysosomal degradation of denuded t. gandii (phase iv) is
lhe djrect cause of parasne detmse or it nmply represents a
ceh-ryprresmcted cytosohc response to clear t gandx'x' rem-
nanm after parasite lallmg m the precedmg steps (phase i, ii,
or iii). i: wﬂl be interesting to ﬁnd out whether other apl-
eomplexarr parames such as nypmrpan'dum, eimen'a, and phar—
mudx'um are subject to the same genes ofpvm dmrupuon and
pathogen membrane denudation reactions after anaxlon of
ammune-acuvaced intestinal and hepatic cells, respectively.
anod‘ler llnportant quesuon 1s whether human cells can exe-
cure the same aggremve paraute ehmmauon strategies descubed
here uslng compensatory mechanisms gwen the apparent loss
of lhe enure farmly ofifn-y—responslve p47 gtpases genes
duung pnmate evoluuon (26).
materials and methods
experimental animals
csan/s, inos’/" sjl (cd45 congcmc), and ,er mice were obmmcd
[mm the jackson labontory there mree. along wrrh igtp’/’ and
igtp’/’nos”’ mice, were bred and nuinumcd undcx speciﬁc parhogerr
rree eondrrrorrs ar rhe brown umvemry arrrrrral eare raeurry, mice anaerh
sexes herweerr 5 and 12 wk ald were ured for experimenrs, s(udus were
performed m accordance wrrh gurdehrree ofthe brown umvemry insume
rioml animal care and use carrrmrrree
parasites
the uracil auxolrophxc cps main of t, gondx'x' wax provrded by d bzxk
(dammurh medreal sehool. hanover, nh; xcference 10). gfpeptg wax
obuined [mm arrrerrear. type culrure coueerhm (no 50941; refexcnce 27).
cps parasites were e, rrradjared :1: 15.000 nds befam ure. in sum: experir
rrrerrrs, [rerh parasirer ﬁxed wirh 3% pznfomnldchydc were used
in vivo priming
far pnmmg, 1m irradrared cps were injected r p, ar day 4 after mirial
irrjeerrorr, arrorher dosage orrhe rarrre pamirer (mi. 1 p ) was rrrrroehaeed (a
boost rhe pnming eﬁeer. aned rrrree were ured on day 7.
in viva infection and survival
gfpeptg xcxuspended m pas was irrjeered irrro rhe perirarreal cavity of
primed mree. at drrrererrr lime perms aﬁcx mreerrorr, pecs were harverred
by lavagjng wrrh rpm] medmm canummg 5% fbs (hydone) flow 0/7
romerry wax ured ro monitor lhe infection rare in pecr. in rurvrval experir
rrrerrrs, primed wt and igtp”’ mice were ehauerrged wrrh 2 5 x 105
gfpeptg 2nd nuce were rrrorrrrored daily
ex viva infection and treatments
pec: {mm pruned or mroglymlarerrrjeered mlce were mixed wirh ampm
in 172 ml annvasrorr medium (dmem wth 1% fbs. mulrrphciry onrrreerior.
[moi] omm) in 15ml eonieal lubts for 1530 min er 37°c to remarrare
memo". cold rpm] wrrh 5% fbs was added to nu rhe lubts free parasius
were removed by merenrial eerrrrrﬁrgarior. inreered mm were reeuspended
in rpmi wilh 10% fbs and ahquored for assays ar diffncnr urne pmnls.
in sum: experrrrrerrrs, pecs ﬁam pruned sjl (cmsy) and igtp”’
(cd45 2’) were rmxed ragerher befam gfpep’tg infection (moi on. 15
min) ex viva surface xmmmg [or c0451 2nd cd452 arrrigen was used (a
drhererrrrare rhe two cell populations by ﬂow eyrorrrerry.
lfn—y ke-tment. [n experrmem where aerivarror. ofthioglycolzteeelip
ited perironeal macrophages m vum was dashed. [fneay (1 ng/ml)
ueamrerrr named 12 h befam mfecuorr and was rmmrairred afrer mfecuorr
biﬁlm—nycin—al uemnem. ta inhibir lysommc function. pec: were
preueared wrrh 100 nm bafdomycmeal [or 1 h. airer infecriorr wuh
znsa
gfp-ptg,  bafi lomycin-a1  was  resupplied  and  maintained  throughout 
the experiment.
pi3k inhibition. 100 nm wortmannin, 100 μm ly294002, and 10 mm 
3-methyladenine were used to inhibit pi3k activity. pi3k inhibitor treat-
ment started 30 min before infection and was maintained after infection. all 
pecs were maintained and all reagents were diluted in rpmi with 10% fbs 
unless otherwise stated.
flow cytometry
pecs were fi xed with cytofix (bd biosciences) before analysis. gfp posi-
tivity  detected  by  fl ow  cytometry  (facscalibur;  becton  dickinson)  was 
used to determine the infection rate in pecs. shown in this study are infec-
tion rates in macrophages, defi ned as being forward scatterhigh and side scat-
terhigh. these large, granular cells were >90% cd11b+f4/80+, as determined 
in  a  separate  experiment  with  surface  staining  for  cd  11b  (bd  biosci-
ences) and f4/80 (ebioscience) antigens.
parasite viability assay
the viability of t. gondii residing in host cells at diff erent time points after 
infection was determined by plaque assay. in brief, a small volume (0.5 ml) 
of infected pec suspension was passed through a 27-gauge needle 10 times 
to liberate the parasites. the needle-passaged lysates (volume adjusted to en-
sure equal plating) were plated onto human foreskin fi broblast monolayers in 
24-well plates. 6 d after plating, the number of plaques was counted and the 
change (relative to time 0) in plaque-forming effi  ciency was calculated.
fluorescent staining and microscopy
lamp1 staining. pecs infected with gfp-ptg in vivo were seeded onto 
fbs-coated coverslips in 24-well plates for 2 h and washed with pbs before 
being prepared for lamp1 staining. for ex vivo infection, pecs were al-
lowed to adhere onto coverslips for 3 h, and nonadherent cells were washed 
away with pbs. after a 10-min incubation with gfp-ptg in invasion me-
dium at 37°c, adherent pecs were washed extensively with pbs to remove 
extracellular parasites. infected cells were incubated in rpmi with 10% me-
dium at 37°c until being processed at diff erent time points for immunofl uo-
rescent staining.
adherent pecs were washed with pbs twice before fi xation with 3% 
paraformaldehyde for 15 min at room temperature. after permeabilization 
(0.1% triton x-100 in pbs for 10 min) and blocking (5% goat serum, 1% 
bsa, 0.05% tween20 in pbs for 1 h), cells were incubated with lamp1 
antibody (1d4b; 0.335 ug/ml, diluted in blocking buff er; dshb, university 
of iowa) for 45 min. rat igg was included as negative control. after wash-
ing, cells were further incubated with alexa fluor 568–conjugated goat anti–
rat  antibody  (1:1,000,  diluted  in  blocking  buff er;  invitrogen)  for  30  min, 
followed by washing and dapi staining. stained coverslips were mounted 
onto slides with prolong antifade (invitrogen) and sealed with nail polish.
igtp staining. pecs from day 7 primed mice were harvested and allowed 
to adhere onto coverslips for 4 h before being fi xed and stained according to 
the similar procedure described above. 1 ug/ml monoclonal anti-igtp anti-
body (bd biosciences) conjugated with alexa fluor 647 (invitrogen) was 
used for staining.
lysosome  labeling  with  texas  red  dextran.  adherent  pecs  were 
pulsed with lysine-fi xable dextran texas red (0.5 mg/ml, 10 kd; invitrogen) 
for 1 h. after washing and 3 h of incubation, dextran was chased into lyso-
somes before gfp-ptg infection (28).
mdc staining. at 2 h after gfp-ptg infection, adherent pecs were in-
cubated with mdc (0.05 mm in pbs; sigma-aldrich) for 10 min. after 
three washes, cells were left in pbs and immediately photographed.
fluorescent  photomicrographs  were  acquired  using  a  zeiss  axiovert 
200m microscope. confocal images were acquired using a leica tcs sp2 
aobs spectral confocal microscope.
em
before  gfp-ptg  infection,  naive  and  primed  macrophages  were  pulsed 
with 6 nm bsa-gold and incubated for 3 h to chase this label into lysosomes. 
15 nm bsa-gold was present during the 15-min pulse infection to distin-
guish between actively invaded and phagocytosed t. gondii parasites. sam-
ples were prepared for transmission em analysis at 1, 2, and 4 h after infection 
as  described  previously  (29).  for  immunoelectron  microscopy,  cells  were 
fi xed  in  4%  paraformaldehyde  (electron  microscopy  sciences)  in  0.25  m 
hepes, ph 7.4, for 1 h at room temperature, and then in 8% paraformalde-
hyde in the same buff er overnight at 4°c (30). they were infi ltrated, frozen, 
and sectioned as previously described (30). the sections were immunola-
beled with anti-igtp antibody (1:20 in pbs/1% fi sh skin gelatin), and then 
with anti–mouse igg antibodies, followed directly by 15 nm of protein a–
gold particles (department of cell biology, medical school, utrecht uni-
versity)  before  examination  with  a  philips  cm120  electron  microscope 
(eindhoven) under 80 kv.
online supplemental material
fig. s1 shows the scheme for the cps-priming gfp-ptg challenge experi-
mental  system.  fig.  s2  shows  the  plaque  assay  determination  of  t.  gondii 
 viability after ex vivo infection of peritoneal cells. fig. s3 shows the cell-
 autonomous eff ect of igtp on parasite clearance by primed pecs. fig. s4 
demonstrates that rapid parasite elimination does not require b cells and ig. 
confocal photomicrographs of dextran-labeled macrophages infected with 
gfp-ptg are shown in fig. s5. fig. s6 shows electron micrographs of para-
site degeneration in primed wt, but not in igtp knockout, macrophages. 
fig. s7 shows pvm indentation in a primed wt macrophage. fig. s8 shows 
that the detached parasite plasma membrane can form complex stacks. fig. s9 
shows additional examples of autophagosomes containing denuded parasites. 
fig. s10 is an electron micrograph of t. gondii remnants within autophagoly-
sosomes containing fl occulated 15-nm gold particles used in this experiment 
to trace lysosomes.  supplementary videos of stacked images (videos s1 
and  s2)  are  also  provided.  online  supplemental  material  is  available  at 
http://www.jem.org/cgi/content/full/jem.20061318/dc1.
we thank j. nathanson and m. belda for help with graphics, g. williams, g. ward, 
and j.f. dubremetz for advice and discussion.
financial support for this work was provided by national institutes of health 
(nih) grant ai 50618 to g.s. yap. g.a. taylor was supported by nih grant ai 57831 
and a va merit review grant.
the authors have no confl icting fi nancial interests.
submitted: 21 june 2006
accepted: 3 august 2006
r e f e r e n c e s 
  1.  dubey,  j.p.,  and  c.p.  beattie.  1988.  toxoplasmosis  of  animals  and 
man. crc press, boca raton. 220 pp.
  2.  miller, l.h., d.i. baruch, k. marsh, and o.k. doumbo. 2002. the 
pathogenic basis of malaria. nature. 415:673–679.
  3.  sinai, a.p., and k.a. joiner. 1997. safe haven: the cell biology of non-
fusogenic pathogen vacuoles. annu. rev. microbiol. 51:415–462.
  4.  jones,  t.c.,  and  j.g.  hirsch.  1972.  the  interaction  between 
toxoplasma  gondii  and  mammalian  cells.  ii.  the  absence  of  lysosomal 
fusion with phagocytic vacuoles containing living parasites. j. exp.  
med. 136:1173–1194.
  5.  schwab, j.c., c.j. beckers, and k.a. joiner. 1994. the parasitophorous 
vacuole membrane surrounding intracellular toxoplasma gondii functions 
as a molecular sieve. proc. natl. acad. sci. usa. 91:509–513.
  6.  sinai, a.p., p. webster, and k.a. joiner. 1997. association of host cell 
endoplasmic  reticulum  and  mitochondria  with  the  toxoplasma  gondii 
parasitophorous vacuole membrane: a high affi  nity interaction. j. cell 
sci. 110:2117–2128.
  7.  yap, g.s., and a. sher. 1999. eff ector cells of both nonhemopoietic 
and hemopoietic origin are required for interferon (ifn)-γ– and tumor 
necrosis factor (tnf)-α–dependent host resistance to the intracellular 
pathogen, toxoplasma gondii. j. exp. med. 189:1083–1092.
2070 
how do activated macrophages eliminate toxoplasma? | ling et al.