cell death and differentiation (2007) 14, 887–894
& 2007 nature publishing group all rights reserved 1350-9047/07 $30.00
www.nature.com/cdd
review
constitutive autophagy: vital role in clearance of
unfavorable proteins in neurons
m komatsu1,2,3, t ueno1, s waguri4, y uchiyama5, e kominami1 and k tanaka*,2
investigations pursued during the last decade on neurodegenerative diseases have revealed a common mechanism underlying
the development of such diseases: conformational disorder of certain proteins leads to the formation of misfolded protein
oligomers, which subsequently develop into large protein aggregates. these aggregates entangle other denatured proteins and
lipids to form disease-speciﬁc inclusion bodies. the failure of the ubiquitin-proteasome system to shred the protein aggregates
has led investigators to focus their attention to autophagy, a bulk degradative system coupled with lysosomes, which is involved
in non-selective shredding of large amounts of cytoplasmic components. research in this ﬁeld has demonstrated the
accumulation of autophagic vacuoles and intracytoplasmic protein aggregates in patients with various neurodegenerative
diseases. although autophagy fails to degrade large protein aggregates once they are formed in the cytoplasm, drug-induced
activation of autophagy is effective in preventing aggregate deposition, indicating that autophagy signiﬁcantly contributes to the
clearance of aggregate-prone proteins. the pivotal role of autophagy in the clearance of aggregate-prone proteins has been
conﬁrmed by a deductive approach using a brain-speciﬁc autophagy-ablated mouse model. in this review, we discuss the
consequences of autophagy deﬁciency in neurons.
cell death and differentiation (2007) 14, 887–894. doi:10.1038/sj.cdd.4402120; published online 2 march 2007
in general,
cell proteins exist in a balance between continuous synthesis
and degradation.
this ﬂow of synthesis and
degradation (i.e., turnover) contributes to exertion of cell-
type-speciﬁc functions and maintenance of cell homeostasis.
however, it is not uncommon that living cells are exposed to
various environmental stresses, such as oxygen radicals and
uv irradiation. unfortunately, these stresses frequently cause
various types of protein injuries that vitiate normal cellular
functions or homeostasis and may eventually cause cell
death. prompt elimination of injured harmful proteins, which
is particularly important in non-proliferative cells, such as
neurons, is totally dependent on proper function of protein
catabolic machineries,
in which two major sophisticated
apparatuses play principal roles. one is the proteasome,
which is an elegantly organized multi-protease complex with
catalytic activities inside its central proteinaceous chamber.
it plays crucial roles in selective degradation of short-lived
regulatory proteins as well as proteins with aberrant structures
that should be eliminated from the cells.1 the other apparatus
is the lysosome that contains many acidic hydrolases, which
are separated from the cytosol by the limiting membrane.
in this lysosomal pathway, degradation of plasma membrane
proteins and extracellular proteins is mediated by endo-
cytosis, whereas that of cytoplasmic components is achieved
through distinct types of autophagic pathways; for example,
macroautophagy, microautophagy, and chaperone-mediated
autophagy.2,3
macroautophagy (hereafter referred to as autophagy), the
major type of autophagy, is the bulk protein degradation
pathway associated with marked membrane dynamics. in
response to various stimuli, such as starvation (i.e., nutritional
step-down) and humoral (trophic) factors (e.g., glucagon and
cytokines), an isolation membrane appears promptly in the
cytosol, where it gradually elongates to sequestrate cytoplas-
mic constituents. subsequently, the edges of the membrane
fuse together to form double-membrane structures termed
autophagosomes. autophagosomes rapidly fuse with lyso-
somes, and their contents engulfed together with the inner
membrane are degraded by a variety of lysosomal digestive
hydrolases (figure 1).4 in addition to the importance of
starvation-induced (i.e., adaptive) autophagy equipped as a
fundamental survival strategy in all eukaryotic cells, growing
lines of evidence point to the importance of basal autophagy
that operates constitutively at low rate even under nutrient-
rich environment and to its key role in global turnover of
cellular components including organelles.
1department of biochemistry, juntendo university school of medicine, tokyo, japan; 2laboratory of frontier science, tokyo metropolitan institute of medical science,
tokyo, japan; 3presto, japan science and technology corporation, kawaguchi, japan; 4department of anatomy and histology, fukushima medical university
school of medicine, fukushima, japan and 5department of cell biology and neurosciences, osaka university graduate school of medicine, osaka, japan
*corresponding author: k tanaka, laboratory of frontier science, tokyo metropolitan institute of medical science, bunkyo-ku, tokyo 113-8613, japan.
tel/fax: þ 81 3 3823 2237; e-mail: tanakak@rinshoken.or.jp
keywords: autophagy; neurodegenerative diseases; ubiquitin; knockout-mice; atg7
abbreviations: ad, alzheimer’s disease; app, amyloid precursor protein; ab, beta-amyloid; gfp, green ﬂuorescent protein; hd, huntington’s disease; lc3,
microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3/map1lc3; mtor, mammalian target of rapamycin; pd, parkinson’s disease; ps1, presenilin-1; sdh, succinate
dehydrogenase; tca, tricarboxylic acid
received 28.11.06; revised 05.2.07; accepted 05.2.07; edited by e baehrecke; published online 02.3.07
888
cytoplasmic components including organelles
the roles of autophagy in neurons
m komatsu et al
isolation membrane
autophagosome
autophagy
lysosome
autolysosome
removal of bacteria
antigen presentation
clearance
amino acid supply
figure 1 schematic representation of the physiological functions of autophagy. autophagy is induced in response to emergency states such as nutrient starvation or
bacterial infection, which results in the degradation of cytoplasmic components for amino-acid supply (non-selective process) and the removal of bacteria that invade the
cytoplasm (selective process). autophagy also contributes to processing viral proteins such as ebna1 and certain cytosolic proteins (e.g., tumor antigens) for presentation
onto major histocompatibility complex (mhc) class ii molecules. autophagy also occurs constitutively even under a nutrient-rich state and contributes to global turnover of
cellular components. it is an essential cellular process that maintains homeostasis in quiescent cells (e.g., hepatocytes and neurons)
starvation-induced autophagy
fundamental
function of autophagy is cellular
the most
adaptation to nutritional stress.
in yeast, autophagy is
promptly induced upon nitrogen starvation.5 transgenic mice
overexpressing gfp (green ﬂuorescent protein)-lc3 is an
for monitoring autophagy.6 lc3
interesting animal model
(microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3/map1lc3),
originally identiﬁed as a small subunit of map-1a/map-1b, is
processed by atg4b protease to expose the carboxyl-terminal
glycine whose residue serves as a donor site for conjugation
of target molecules.7–9 the processed form (lc3-i) under-
goes two consecutive ubiquitylation-like modiﬁcation reac-
tions catalyzed by atg7 (e1, activating-like enzyme) and atg3
(e2, conjugating-like enzyme), to be covalently coupled with
phosphatidylethanolamine (pe).10–12 the pe-conjugated
form, designated as lc3-ii, is then recruited to autophago-
somal membrane. thus, lc3-ii is a promising marker for
autophagosomal membranes.7 similar to endogenous lc3,
gfp-lc3 responds to nutrient-starved conditions to form
gfp-lc3-ii, which is recruited to autophagosomes in gfp-
lc3 transgenic mice.6 the autophagosomal gfp-lc3-ii
could be detected as dots in ﬂuorescence microscopic
analyses. under fasting conditions, the numbers of ﬂuores-
cent dots increase in the cytoplasm of the liver, heart, and
skeletal muscles of gfp-lc3 transgenic mice.
starvation-induced protein degradation has been best
investigated in the liver. one unequivocal characteristic of
hepatic protein degradation is its dependence on the nutrient
conditions. depending on the dietary cycle of the animal, the
rate of protein degradation ﬂuctuates between b1.5% (fed
state) and b4.5% (fasted state) of total
liver proteins per
hour.13 recently, we generated atg7f/f:mx1 mice in which
autophagy could be successfully inactivated in the livers.14
whereas the amount of total liver proteins decreased to about
66% in the control liver by 1-day fasting, fasting did not result
in a signiﬁcant decrease in the amount of total proteins in the
autophagy-deﬁcient liver, indicating that the decrease in total
proteins upon fasting is indeed dependent on autophagy.
measurement of
the activity of mitochondrial enzyme,
succinate dehydrogenase (sdh), showed that fasting was
also associated with a signiﬁcant decrease in sdh activity
in total extracts in the control livers, and such reduction was
proportional with the decrease in the amount of total protein.
on the other hand, fasting was not associated with any
change in sdh activity in the autophagy-deﬁcient
livers.
these results suggest that the mitochondria and cytoplasmic
proteins are proportionally degraded upon fasting by auto-
phagy. thus, it is plausible that autophagosomes surround
cytoplasmic components including mitochondria at random to
adapt for starvation.
yeast deﬁcient in autophagy rapidly dies under nutrition-
poor conditions,15 suggesting the important roles of autop-
hagy in maintaining nutrient supply. indeed, newborn mice
deﬁcient
in atg5 or atg7, which are indispensable for
autophagosome formation, show poor response to starvation
with regard to production of amino acids, and die within the
ﬁrst day of life.14,16 furthermore, lum et al.17 reported that in
il-3-dependent cells, which cannot undergo apoptosis due to
knockout of both bax and bak, impairment of autophagy leads
to rapid cell death by loss of
il-3, and such death is
suppressed by addition of methylpyruvate, a tca (tricar-
boxylic acid) substrate. these results suggest that one of the
important roles of autophagy is the supply of amino acids
under nutrient-poor environment (figure 2, top panel).
unique features of neuronal autophagy
the brain appears to be a specially protected tissue where
nutrients (e.g., amino acids, glucose, and ketone bodies) are
compensated by constant supply from other organs even
under starvation conditions and consequently autophagy
does not operate in response to nutritional stress. indeed,
autophagosomes-related gfp-lc3 dots do not increase at all
cell death and differentiation
the roles of autophagy in neurons
m komatsu et al
889
starvation feeding
liver
autophagic vacuoles in neurodegenerative diseases
induced
basal
basal
brain
age
rapamycin (inactivation of mtor)
figure 2 schematic presentation of induced autophagy and basal (constitutive)
autophagy. under nutrient-rich conditions, autophagic proteolysis proceeds in
hepatocytes at a basal rate (top panel, pink zone), which is enhanced two- to
threefold to an induced rate under nutrient-starvation conditions (blue zone). when
animals are re-fed, the rate of autophagic proteolysis promptly returns to the basal
level. in contrast to the liver, autophagy in the brain is thought to proceed at a basal
rate,
this basal or constitutive
autophagy plays a critical role in the quality control system of neurons. rapamycin
and its homologs, which upregulate autophagy to an induced level (bottom panel,
broken line), are expected to prevent the accumulation of aggregate-prone proteins.
it should be noted that autophagic activity declines with age, which may relate to the
age-dependent onset of neurodegenerative diseases
irrespective of nutrient conditions. however,
in the brain of gfp-lc3 transgenic mice, irrespective of
fasting.6 a reasonable conclusion drawn from these observa-
tions is that autophagy in the brain proceeds at a basal rate
but is not enhanced under fasting conditions (figure 2, bottom
panel). another peculiar feature of autophagy in neurons is
the free localization of autophagosomes in the cytoplasm but
the restriction of
lysosomes mainly to the juxtanuclear
cytoplasm of the cell body in the neuron. this feature means
that autophagosomes formed in dendrites and synaptic
terminal regions must be transported to the lysosome in the
cell body. a previous kinetic analysis of organelle movements
in cultured neurons indicated that phase-dense vesicles,
containing sequestered cytoplasmic proteins and materials
taken up by endocytosis, move along microtubules in the axon
to the lysosomes in the cell body.18 these data suggest that
fusion of autophagosomes formed in the synaptic cytoplasm
with lysosomes is strictly dependent on retrograde axonal
transport. it has been reported that mutations of dynein and
dynactin in mice and human cause motor neuron degenera-
tion resembling amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.19,20 using
cultured pc12 cells, ﬂies and mice expressing different kinds
of aggregate-prone proteins, such as expanded polyq and
mutant a-synuclein, ravikumar et al.21 demonstrated that
inhibition of dynein function retarded the clearance of
aggregates by inhibiting autophagosome-lysosome fusion. it
has been shown recently that aggregate-prone proteins
formed in the cytoplasm of cultured hela cells and a cultured
neural cell line, are degraded by autophagy, which is also
dependent on intact microtubules.22
morphological analyses revealed that accumulation of abnor-
mally large number of autophagic vacuoles (autophagosomes
plus autolysosomes) or the appearance of irregularly shaped
autophagic vacuoles is frequently observed as a common
feature in many inherited neurodegenerative diseases.23–27
inclusion bodies, composed of ubiquitin-positive cytoplasmic
remnants, and lipofuscin deposits, together with dispersed
autophagic vacuoles and lysosomes are the primary hall-
marks of the late stages of these diseases. increased density
of autophagic vacuoles seems to reﬂect enhanced autopha-
gosome formation, on one hand, but
their accumulation
with blurred structures of sequestered materials in their lumen
may also imply impaired autolysosomal degradation, on the
other. in fact, these morphological features are not present
in normal neurons and resemble those of cultured hek293
cells that have been placed under starvation conditions
in the presence of lysosomal proteinase inhibitors.28 under
these conditions, autophagic response is markedly enhanced,
but autophagic proteolysis is simultaneously inhibited.
in
addition, as observed in danon disease, which is caused by
mutation of the lysosome-associated membrane protein-2
(lamp-2), and lamp-2-deﬁcient mice,
impairment of
autophagosome-lysosome fusion also leads to unequivocal
increment of autophagosomes in cardiac muscles and
hepatocytes.29,30
autophagy in alzheimer’s, huntington’s, and
parkinson’s diseases
protein conformational disorders, such as alzheimer’s dis-
ease (ad), huntington’s disease (hd), and parkinson’s
disease (pd), are characterized by abnormally high accumu-
lation of misfolded and/or unfolded proteins in the surviving
neurons as detected at postmortem examination.
in this
section, we will evaluate the role of autophagy in those
hereditary neurodegenerative diseases.
in its n-terminus.
it has become clear that autophagy is linked to the
pathogenesis of hd. hd is an autosomal dominant disorder
caused by mutations of huntingtin, a cytosolic protein that has
a polyglutamine (polyq) tract
in hd,
abnormal expansion of polyq caused by codon (cag)
reiterations in exon 1 of the huntingtin gene produces mutated
huntingtin with an expanded polyq repeat (more than 37
polyqs). mutant huntingtin with a longer polyq tract has a
stronger tendency than the wild type to form aggregates, both
accelerating the onset and worsening the severity of the
disease, suggesting that the progressive formation of inso-
luble polyq aggregates is a key event leading to manifestation
of the disease. indeed, model mouse with mutant polyq is
associated with formation of nuclear and cytoplasmic inclu-
sions in their neurons.31 however, recent studies revealed
that globular and protoﬁbrillar intermediates form before the
organization of mature huntingtin aggregates, and that these
are toxic and could lead to disturbances of genetic transcrip-
tion networks and mitochondrial dysfunctions.32,33 then, what
are the mechanisms by which autophagy clears mutant
huntingtin? ultrastructural examination of huntingtin-trans-
fected cells showed abundant accumulation of cathepsin
cell death and differentiation
890
the roles of autophagy in neurons
m komatsu et al
d-positive autophagic vacuoles with or without sequestered
cellular constituents, dense lysosomes, and multilamellar and
tubuloveseicular structures.26 ravikumar et al.34 investigated
whether autophagy can degrade mutant huntingtin with
expanded polyq repeats. degradation of 74 polyq repeats
fused to the amino terminus of gfp (polyq74-gfp) trans-
fected into cos7 or pc12 cells was inhibited by
3-methyladenine, a speciﬁc inhibitor of autophagy, and
enhanced by rapamycin. rapamycin acts by inhibiting the
mammalian target of rapamycin (mtor) kinase, which forms
the core of a nutrient- and growth factor-sensitive complex
that control protein synthesis, and suppresses autophagy.35
importantly,
inhibitors of autophagy enhance cell death,
whereas rapamycin prevents the effects. furthermore, once
the overexpressed polyq74-gfp forms insoluble large
aggregates, the insoluble aggregates become resistant to
rapamycin-induced autophagy. the data clearly demonstrate
that failure to degrade polyq expansions by autophagy is
associated with accelerated progression of hd and that
stimulation of autophagy in the early stages of the disease
by rapamycin treatment could prevent deposition of polyq
aggregates. rapamycin enhances the autophagic clearance
of different proteins with long polyq and polyalanine (polya)-
expanded proteins, and reduces their neurotoxicity. thus,
rapamycin and its analogs can be potentially used therapeu-
tically for neurodegenerative diseases caused by aggregate-
prone proteins.36 it has been shown that mtor is sequestered
in polyq aggregates in transgenic mice expressing mutant
huntingtin and patient brains of hd. sequestration of mtor
in polyq aggregates inhibits nuclear-cytoplasm shuttling of
mtor, leading to inactivation of mtor.37 the inactivation in
turn induces autophagy. hence, co-sequestration of aggre-
gates with mtor leads to inhibition of mtor activity, which may
provide a partial explanation for accumulation of autophagic
vacuoles in neurodegenerative diseases. on the other hand,
the activation of autophagy via an insulin signal pathway
clears accumulated polyq proteins independent of mtor, as
reported by yamamoto et al.38 they found that aggregates of
mutant huntingtin activate insulin receptor substrate-2 invol-
ving the signaling cascades of insulin and insulin-like growth
factor 1. such activation turns on class iii pi3k to induce
autophagy,
thus contributing to clearance of huntingtin
aggregates.38
invariably, ad is the most prevalent
form of neurode-
generative diseases with dementia and associates with extra-
cellular deposition of beta-amyloid (ab). presenilin-1 (ps1) is
one of several proteins linked to early-onset familial ad, and
together with ps2, plays a catalytic role in the g-secretase
complex necessary for intermediate proteolysis of the amyloid
precursor protein (app) followed by liberation of ab. although
it has been noticed that autophagic vacuoles accumulate
in hippocampal and prefrontal cortical pyramidal neurons of
alzheimer-type dementia,23,24 the mechanism remains un-
clear. wilson et al.39 found the formation of enlarged late
endosome-like structures, including a- and b-synuclein, in the
perikarya of ps1
primary neurons and hippocampal tissue
of patients with the levy body variant of ad. formation of such
organelles is rescued by exogenous expression of not only
wild-type ps but also dominant-negative ps1 lacking its
activity, indicating that ps1 has another function besides
 / 
cell death and differentiation
 / 
g-secretase. esselens et al.40 demonstrated the accumulation
of
telencephalin, a neural speciﬁc intercellular adhesion
molecule known to interact with ps1, in vacuoles positive for
atg12 and lc3, but not cathepsin d, in ps1
hippocampal
neurons. similar to the report of wilson et al,39 the formation of
such vacuoles was suppressed by not only wild-type but also
mutant ps1. furthermore, esselens et al.40 used cathepsin d
knockout mice to show the degradation of telencephalin in
lysosomes. collectively, these results suggest that ps1 might
play important roles in autophagosome and lysosomal fusion
step. recently, yu et al.41 reported the role of autophagy in ab
production. their exhaustive electron and immunoelectron
microscopic analyses revealed accumulation of lc3-positive
autophagic vacuoles in brains of ad patients and in ad model
mice, neural cell lines, and in a non-neural app-expressing
cell line, and also the localization of ps1, ab40, ab42, and
necastrin on internal and limiting membrane components
of autophagic vacuoles. further, they found that induction of
autophagy evoked ab production, and inversely, inhibition of
autophagy suppressed ab production. finally, they observed
the ps1-dependent g-secretase activity in biochemical iso-
lated autophagic vacuoles. based on these ﬁndings, they
proposed a novel mechanism for the generation of ab via
autophagy that emphasized the prominent role of autophagy
in ad pathogenesis.41
pd is a neurodegenerative disorder associated with
progressive loss of dopaminergic neurons of the substantia
nigra and locus coeruleus. the major clinical symptoms of pd
are body rigidity, hypokinesia, and postural instability asso-
ciated with trembling extremities.42 pathological examination
shows marked accumulation of cytoplasmic inclusions of
proteinaceous material with lipids called lewy bodies. lewy
bodies consist of
lipids, ubiquitin, enzymes involved in
ubiquitin-related pathways, neuroﬁlament proteins, a-synu-
clein, synphilin-1, and other entangled proteins. mutations in
the gene encoding a-synuclein, which is localized in pre-
synaptic terminals and is abundantly present
in lewy
bodies, are identiﬁed in certain cases of familial pd.43,44
a-synuclein is a protein of unknown function and a major
component of lewy bodies. among three point mutations in
a-synuclein causing an autosomal dominant form of familial
pd, two mutations of a-synuclein (a53t and a30p) have
been studied extensively. these a-synuclein mutants have a
stronger tendency to form ﬁbrils than wild-type a-synuclein.
hence, similar to huntingtin with abnormal polyq expansion,
misfolded or aggregated a-synuclein is believed to
cause cell
toxicity and inhibits the ubiquitin-proteasome
system. lewy bodies may contribute to aggregation of
a-synuclein into inclusions to moderate its toxicity.45,46
it has been reported recently that autophagic-lysosomal
dysfunction may be also involved in pd. using stable pc12
transfectants expressing wild-type and a53t mutant
a-synuclein, stefanis et al.47 showed that marked accumula-
tion of autophagic vacuoles and impairment of lysosomal
and ubiquitin-proteasome functions are principal phenotypes
in the cells. on the other hand, clearance of mutant
a-synuclein is strongly dependent on both ubiquitin-protea-
somes and macroautophagy,48 but not chaperone-mediated
autophagy capable of degrading wild-type a-synuclein
efﬁciently.49
the roles of autophagy in neurons
m komatsu et al
891
impairment of autophagy in neurons
recently, our group and mizushima’s group investigated the
pathophysiological roles of basal or constitutive autophagy in
the brain.50,51 for this purpose, we generated neuron-speciﬁc
autophagy-deﬁcient mice (atg7f/f:nes mice) by crossing
atg7-conditional knockout mice (atg7f/f) with transgenic
mice expressing the cre recombinase under the control of
the neuron-speciﬁc nestin (nes) promoter, nes-cre. we
found that mice lacking atg7 (i.e., autophagy) in the central
nervous system exhibited various behavioral deﬁcits, such as
abnormal limb-clasping reﬂexes and reduction of coordinated
movement, and died within 28 weeks after birth. histological
analysis showed that atg7-deﬁciency was associated with
neuronal loss in the cerebral and cerebellar cortices. intrigu-
ingly, atg7-deﬁcient neurons showed abundant accumulation
of polyubiquitylated proteins, which appeared as inclusion
bodies whose size and number
increased with aging
(figure 3), but had functionally intact proteasomes, whose
impairment is generally known to cause abnormal ubiquitin-
mediated proteolysis.50 hara et al.51 also reported that almost
all these phenotypes, if not all, were observed in neural-
speciﬁc mice deﬁcient in atg5, another autophagy-essential
gene. thus, many of the critical symptoms seen in neural-
speciﬁc autophagy-deﬁcient mice are similar to those of
patients with neurodegenerative disorders.
histological analyses of the brains of atg7f/f:nes mice
revealed loss of speciﬁc neurons, such as pyramidal neurons
in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus, and purkinje cells in
the cerebellum. unexpectedly, immunohistological analysis
using anti-ubiquitin antibody identiﬁed ubiquitin-positive
proteinaceous aggregates throughout
the brain, although
the staining intensity varied from one region to another. few
ubiquitin-positive inclusions were recognized in brain regions
with evident neuronal loss, whereas many ubiquitin inclusions
were noted in areas with barely any neuronal loss such as the
hypothalamus. although we could not determine whether
neuronal death is due to accumulation and subsequent
inclusion formation of ubiquitylated proteins, neurons with
large inclusions survived. conversely, large pyramidal neu-
rons and purkinje cells seem vulnerable to ubiquitylated
proteins and die before the formation of large inclusions.
whether the formation of
inclusion bodies in neurons is
protective or
toxic is under debate, although emerging
evidence emphasizes that protein aggregation can be a
protective mechanism.32,33
although accumulation of ubiquitylated proteins and cell
death were noted in autophagy-deﬁcient hepatocytes14 and
neurons,50,51 such phenotypes were not observed in growing
cells such as mouse embryonic ﬁbroblasts (mefs) and
astroglial cells, irrespective of autophagy deﬁciency. thus, it
seems that autophagy is not required in rapidly dividing cells,
at least with respect to multiplication of these cells. these
results might also reﬂect the difference in autophagic activity
among cell types. it is possible that the cell division cycle
results in dilution of ubiquitylated proteins in autophagy-
deﬁcient mefs, preventing their accumulation. alternatively,
other degradation pathways, such as chaperone-mediated
autophagy, could contribute to degradation of
long-lived
proteins in growing mefs. considered together, it is clear
that macroautophagy (the massive autophagy pathway
discussed here) plays important
roles in proteolysis in
quiescent cells.
turnover of cytoplasmic components,
autophagy deﬁciency is considered to result in delays of
global
resulting in
accumulation of misfolded and/or unfolded proteins followed
by formation of inclusion bodies. however, a recent report
showed that p62/sqstm1 harboring a ubiquitin binding
domain, interacted with lc3 and was degraded via auto-
phagy.52 we also obtained similar results and found that
cerebral cortex
f/+:nes
f/f:nes
amygdala
f/+:nes
f/f:nes
purkinje cell
f/+:nes
f/f:nes
hypothalamus
f/+:nes
f/f:nes
hippocampus
f/+:nes
f/f:nes
caudate putmen
f/+:nes
f/f:nes
figure 3 ubiquitin-positive inclusions in autophagy-deﬁcient neurons. the presence of ubiquitin-positive dots was examined immunohistochemically in several regions of
the brain including cerebral cortex, cerebellum (purkinje cells), hippocampus, amygdala, hypothalamus, caudate putamen of atg7f/ þ
:nes (left panels), and atg7f/f:nes (right
panels) mice. note the presence of numerous ubiquitin dots in the amygdala and hypothalamus of representative mutants. bars, 100 mm in the panel of cerebral cortex, and
50 mm in others
cell death and differentiation
892
the roles of autophagy in neurons
m komatsu et al
normal condition
ub
ub
ub
ub
ub
26s proteasome
stress or 
genetic mutation
ub
ub
ub
ub
autophagy
autophagy-deficiency
ub
ub
ub
ub
ub
26s proteasome
stress or 
genetic mutation
ub
ub
ub
ub
soluble ubiquitinated protein
ub
ub
ub
ub
ub
ub
ub
ub
ub
ub
ub
ub
ub
ub
ub
ub
ub
ub
ub
ub
ub
ub
ub
ub
insoluble ubiquitinated protein
ubiquitinated inclusion
figure 4 a schematic diagram of protein destruction pathways mediated by the proteasome and autophagy. the majority of cellular proteins, if not all, are
polyubiquitylated before hydrolysis by the proteasome (an atp-dependent proteolytic complex). similarly, unfolded/misfolded proteins generated by environmental stresses or
genetic mutations are discarded after polyubiquitylation by the same proteolytic system (a). aging-related decline in autophagic activity causes accumulation of highly
ubiquitylated proteins, which are recovered as both soluble and insoluble forms (b). as autophagy could feed both ubiquitylated and unubiquitylated protein(s), it is not clear at
present whether polyubiquitylated aggregates/inclusions in autophagy-deﬁcient neurons are formed consequent to impairment of degradation of unubiquitylated proteins or
aggressively polyubiquitylated proteins. in addition, further work is needed to determine whether the two proteolytic systems (autophagy and proteasomes) work independently
or cooperatively, and whether autophagy and the proteasome feed a similar set of normal and/or misfolded/unfolded proteins in general. red text: protein dynamics associated
with autophagy deﬁciency, ub: ubiquitin
p62 plays a critical role in the formation of ubiquitin-positive
aggregates by impaired autophagy (unpublished data). these
results imply that ubiquitylated unfavorable proteins might be
selectively sequestered into autophagosomes in part via p62
(which may retain its shuttling ability of ubiquitylated proteins).
in either case (non-selective or selective degradation of
ubiquitylated proteins by autophagy), our results indicate that
autophagy operates not only as a supplier of amino acids
under nutrient-poor conditions but also as a house cleaner of
damaged proteins under nutrient-rich conditions.
concluding remarks
considering the role of autophagy in neurodegenerative
diseases, it is possible to align time-dependent enhancement
and inactivation of autophagy. first, misfolded and/or
cell death and differentiation
unfolded protein aggregates formed in neurons cause
sequestration of mtor along with the aggregates, leading to
signiﬁcant inactivation of mtor, which stimulates autophagy
(autophagosome formation). second, if the size of aggregates
is small enough and the degree of aggregation is moderate,
the aggregates are engulfed into autophagosomal lumen and
subsequently degraded via autophagy. unless the amounts of
aggregates surpass the clearance capacity of autophago-
somes, maximal activation of autophagy by pharmaceutical
agents such as rapamycin could be effective in preventing the
progression of the disease. it is noteworthy that the expres-
sion of aggregation-prone protein(s) observed frequently in
familial neurodegenerative disorders is not required for the
formation of inclusions associated with impaired autophagy,
suggesting the involvement of autophagy even in sporadic
neurodegenerative diseases. on the other hand, autophagic
activity of rat liver decreases with aging and this decrease
conversely correlates with an increase in the accumulation of
oxidized proteins.36 thus, age-dependent onset of neuro-
degenerative diseases most likely correlates with the age-
dependent decline of autophagic activity.
is generally
accepted that deﬁcits of the proteasome-ubiquitin system
are linked to various neurodegenerative disorders. intrigu-
ingly, however, no obvious inhibition of the ubiquitin-protea-
some system occurs in the mouse brain lacking autophagy,
providing compelling evidence that constitutive autophagy
plays a prominent role in neuronal survival, independent of
proteasome function (figure 4). in this context, we stress that
proteasome inhibition induces augmented autophagy in order
to eliminate unnecessary accumulated proteins, probably
compensating the loss of proteasome functions.22 thus, the
two major proteolytic pathways naturally differ in the co-
operative responses in cells. we emphasize the importance of
autophagy as a process with adaptive and ﬂexible responses.
finally, a better understanding of basal or constitutive
autophagy, which maintains basal activity of macroautophagy
in neurons, may help in the design of new strategies to prevent
neurodegenerative diseases.
it
1. goldberg al. protein degradation and protection against misfolded or damaged proteins.
nature 2003; 426: 895–899.
2. levine b, klionsky dj. development by self-digestion: molecular mechanisms and
biological functions of autophagy. dev cell 2004; 6: 463–477.
3. cuervo am. autophagy: in sickness and in health. trends cell biol 2004; 14: 70–77.
4. mizushima n, ohsumi y, yoshimori t. autophagosome formation in mammalian cells.
cell struct funct 2002; 27: 421–429.
5. takeshige k, baba m, tsuboi s, noda t, ohsumi y. autophagy in yeast demonstrated
with proteinase-deﬁcient mutants and conditions for its induction. j cell biol 1992; 119:
301–311.
6. mizushima n, yamamoto a, matsui m, yoshimori t, ohsumi y.
in vivo analysis of
autophagy in response to nutrient starvation using transgenic mice expressing a
ﬂuorescent autophagosome marker. mol biol cell 2004; 15: 1101–1111.
7. kabeya y, mizushima n, ueno t, yamamoto a, kirisako t, noda t et al. lc3, a
mammalian homologue of yeast apg8p, is localized in autophagosome membranes after
processing. embo j 2000; 19: 5720–5728.
8. kabeya y, mizushima n, yamamoto a, oshitani-okamoto s, ohsumi y, yoshimori t. lc3,
gabarap and gate16 localize to autophagosomal membrane depending on form-ii
formation. j cell sci 2004; 117: 2805–2812.
9. tanida i, sou ys, ezaki j, minematsu-ikeguchi n, ueno t, kominami e. hsatg4b/
hsapg4b/autophagin-1 cleaves the carboxyl termini of three human atg8 homologues and
delipidates microtubule-associated protein light chain 3- and gabaa receptor-associated
protein-phospholipid conjugates. j biol chem 2004; 279: 36268–36276.
ichimura y, kirisako t, takao t, satomi y, shimonishi y, ishihara n et al. a ubiquitin-like
system mediates protein lipidation. nature 2000; 408: 488–492.
10.
the roles of autophagy in neurons
m komatsu et al
893
11. tanida i, tanida-miyake e, ueno t, kominami e. the human homolog of saccharomyces
cerevisiae apg7p is a protein-activating enzyme for multiple substrates including human
apg12p, gate-16, gabarap, and map-lc3. j biol chem 2001; 276: 1701–1706.
12. tanida i, tanida-miyake e, komatsu m, ueno t, kominami e. human apg3p/aut1p
homologue is an authentic e2 enzyme for multiple substrates, gate-16, gabarap, and
map-lc3, and facilitates the conjugation of hapg12p to hapg5p. j biol chem 2002; 277:
13739–13744.
13. mortimore ge, hutson nj, surmacz ca. quantitative correlation between proteolysis and
macro- and microautophagy in mouse hepatocytes during starvation and refeeding. proc
natl acad sci usa 1993; 80: 2179–2183.
14. komatsu m, waguri s, ueno t, iwata j, murata s, tanida i et al. impairment of starvation-
induced and constitutive autophagy in atg7-deﬁcient mice. j cell biol 2005; 169: 425–434.
15. tsukada m, ohsumi y. isolation and characterization of autophagy-defective mutants of
saccharomyces cerevisiae. febs lett 1993; 333: 169–174.
16. kuma a, hatano m, matsui m, yamamoto a, nakaya h, yoshimori t et al. the role of
autophagy during the early neonatal starvation period. nature 2004; 432: 1032–1036.
17. lum jj, bauer de, kong m, harris mh, li c, lindsten t et al. growth factor regulation of
autophagy and cell survival in the absence of apoptosis. cell 2005; 120: 237–248.
18. hollenbeck pj. products of endocytosis and autophagy are retrieved from axons by
regulated retrograde organelle transport. j cell biol 1993; 121: 305–315.
19. puls i, jonnakuty c, lamonte bh, holzbaur el, tokito m, mann e et al. mutant dynactin in
motor neuron disease. nat genet 2003; 33: 455–456.
20. hafezparast m, klocke r, ruhrberg c, marquardt a, ahmad-annuar a, bowen s et al.
mutations in dynein link motor neuron degeneration to defects in retrograde transport.
science 2003; 300: 808–812.
21. ravikumar b, acevedo-arozena a, imarisio s, berger z, vacher c, o’kane cj et al.
dynein mutations impair autophagic clearance of aggregate-prone proteins. nat genet
2005; 37: 771–776.
iwata a, riley be, johnston ja, kopito rr. hdac6 and microtubules are required for
autophagic degradation of aggregated huntingtin. j biol chem 2005; 280: 40282–40292.
iizuka t, yanagisawa t, watanabe m. reexamination of
23. okamoto k, hirai s,
22.
granulovacuolar degeneration. acta neuropathol (berlin) 1991; 82: 340–345.
24. cataldo am, hamilton dj, barnett jl, paskevich pa, nixon ra. properties of
the
endosomal-lysosomal system in the human central nervous system: disturbances mark
most neurons in populations at risk to degenerate in alzheimer’s disease. j neurosci 1996;
16: 186–199.
25. anglade p, vyas s, javoy-agid f, herrero mt, michel pp, marquez j et al. apoptosis and
autophagy in nigral neurons of patients with parkinson’s disease. histol histopathol 1997;
12: 25–31.
26. kegel kb, kim m, sapp e, mcintyre c, castano jg, aronin n et al. huntingtin expression
stimulates endosomal-lysosomal activity, endosome tubulation, and autophagy. j neurosci
2000; 20: 7268–7278.
27. petersen a, larsen ke, behr gg, romero n, przedborski s, brundin p et al. expanded
cag repeats in exon 1 of the huntington’s disease gene stimulate dopamine-mediated
striatal neuron autophagy and degeneration. hum mol genet 2001; 10: 1243–1254.
28. tanida i, minematsu-ikeguchi n, ueno t, kominami e. lysosomal
turnover, but
not a cellular level, of endogenous lc3 is a marker for autophagy. autophagy 2005; 1:
84–91.
29. nishino i, fu j, tanji k, yamada t, shimojo s, koori t et al. primary lamp-2 deﬁciency
causes x-linked vacuolar cardiomyopathy and myopathy (danon disease). nature 2000;
406: 906–910.
30. tanaka y, guhde g, suter a, eskelinen el, hartmann d, lullmann-rauch r et al.
accumulation of autophagic vacuoles and cardiomyopathy in lamp-2-deﬁcient mice.
nature 2000; 406: 902–906.
ikeda h, yamaguchi m, sugai s, aze y, narumiya s, kakizuka a. expanded polyglutamine
in the machado–joseph disease protein induces cell death in vitro and in vivo. nat genet
1996; 13: 196–202.
31.
32. sanchez i, mahlke c, yuan j. pivotal role of oligomerization in expanded polyglutamine
neurodegenerative disorders. nature 2003; 421: 373–379.
33. arrasate m, mitra s, schweitzer es, segal mr, finkbeiner s. inclusion body formation
reduces levels of mutant huntingtin and the risk of neuronal death. nature 2004; 431:
805–810.
34. ravikumar b, duden r, rubinsztein dc. aggregate-prone proteins with polyglutamine
and polyalanine expansions are degraded by autophagy. hum mol genet 2002; 11:
1107–1117.
inoki k, corradetti mn, guan kl. dysregulation of the tsc-mtor pathway in human
disease. nat genet 2005; 37: 19–24.
35.
36. bergamini e. autophagy: a cell repair mechanism that retards ageing and age-associated
diseases and can be intensiﬁed pharmacologically. mol aspects med 2006; 27: 403–410.
37. ravikumar b, vacher c, berger z, davies je, luo s, oroz lg et al. inhibition of mtor
induces autophagy and reduces toxicity of polyglutamine expansions in ﬂy and mouse
models of huntington disease. nat genet 2004; 36: 585–595.
38. yamamoto a, cremona ml, rothman je. autophagy-mediated clearance of huntingtin
aggregates triggered by the insulin-signaling pathway. j cell biol 2006; 172: 719–731.
39. wilson ca, murphy dd, giasson bi, zhang b, trojanowski jq, lee vm. degradative
organelles containing mislocalized alpha-and beta-synuclein proliferate in presenilin-1 null
neurons. j cell biol 2004; 165: 335–346.
cell death and differentiation
894
the roles of autophagy in neurons
m komatsu et al
40. esselens c, oorschot v, baert v, raemaekers t, spittaels k, serneels l et al. presenilin 1
telencephalin in hippocampal neurons via an autophagic
mediates the turnover of
degradative pathway. j cell biol 2004; 166: 1041–1054.
41. yu wh, cuervo am, kumar a, peterhoff cm, schmidt sd, lee jh et al. macroautophagy –
a novel beta-amyloid peptide-generating pathway activated in alzheimer’s disease. j cell
biol 2005; 171: 87–98.
42. jenner p, olanow cw. understanding cell death in parkinson’s disease. ann neurol 1998;
44: s72–s84.
43. kruger r, kuhn w, muller t, woitalla d, graeber m, kosel s et al. ala30pro mutation in the
gene encoding alpha-synuclein in parkinson’s disease. nat genet 1998; 18: 106–108.
44. polymeropoulos mh, lavedan c, leroy e, ide se, dehejia a, dutra a et al. mutation in the
alpha-synuclein gene identiﬁed in families with parkinson’s disease. science 1997; 276:
2045–2047.
45. chung kk, dawson vl, dawson tm. the role of the ubiquitin-proteasomal pathway in
parkinson’s disease and other neurodegenerative disorders. trends neurosci 2001; 24:
s7–s14.
46. mouradian mm. recent advances in the genetics and pathogenesis of parkinson disease.
neurology 2002; 58: 179–185.
47. stefanis l, larsen ke, rideout hj, sulzer d, greene la. expression of a53t mutant but
not wild-type alpha-synuclein in pc12 cells induces alterations of the ubiquitin-dependent
degradation system, loss of dopamine release, and autophagic cell death. j neurosci
2001; 21: 9549–9560.
48. webb jl, ravikumar b, atkins j, skepper jn, rubinsztein dc. alpha-synuclein is
degraded by both autophagy and the proteasome. j biol chem 2003; 278: 25009–25013.
49. cuervo am, stefanis l, fredenburg r, lansbury pt, sulzer d. impaired degradation of
mutant alpha-synuclein by chaperone-mediated autophagy. science 2004; 305:
1292–1295.
50. komatsu m, waguri s, chiba t, murata s, iwata j, tanida i et al. loss of autophagy
in the central nervous system causes neurodegeneration in mice. nature 2006; 441:
880–884.
51. hara t, nakamura k, matsui m, yamamoto a, nakahara y, suzuki-migishima r et al.
suppression of basal autophagy in neural cells causes neurodegenerative disease in mice.
nature 2006; 441: 885–889.
52. bjorkoy g, lamark t, brech a, outzen h, perander m, overvatn a et al. p62/sqstm1
forms protein aggregates degraded by autophagy and has a protective effect on huntingtin-
induced cell death. j cell biol 2005; 171: 603–614.
cell death and differentiation