membrane transport, structure, function,
and biogenesis:
microtubules support production of
starvation-induced autophagosomes but 
not their targeting and fusion with
lysosomes
  
ephraim fass, elena shvets, ilan degani,
koret hirschberg and zvulun elazar
j. biol. chem. 
2006, 281:36303-36316.
doi: 10.1074/jbc.m607031200 originally published online september 8, 2006
10.1074/jbc.m607031200
access the most updated version of this article at doi: 
  
find articles, minireviews, reflections and classics on similar topics on the 
  
alerts: 
•  
•  
  
when this article is cited
when a correction for this article is posted
jbc affinity sites
click here
 to choose from all of jbc's e-mail alerts
supplemental material:
http://www.jbc.org/content/suppl/2006/09/11/m607031200.dc1.html
  
this article cites 43 references, 18 of which can be accessed free at
http://www.jbc.org/content/281/47/36303.full.html#ref-list-1
  
the journal of biological chemistry vol. 281, no. 47, pp. 36303–36316, november 24, 2006
© 2006 by the american society for biochemistry and molecular biology, inc. printed in the u.s.a.
microtubules support production of starvation-induced
autophagosomes but not their targeting and fusion
with lysosomes*□s
received for publication, july 24, 2006, and in revised form, september 7, 2006 published, jbc papers in press, september 8, 2006, doi 10.1074/jbc.m607031200
ephraim fass‡1, elena shvets‡1, ilan degani‡, koret hirschberg§, and zvulun elazar‡2
from the ‡departments of biological chemistry and chemical physics, weizmann institute of science, rehovot, 76100 and the
§department of cell and developmental biology, sackler faculty of medicine, tel-aviv university, ramat-aviv 69978, israel
autophagy is a major catabolic pathway in eukaryotic cells
whereby the lack of amino acids induces the formation of
autophagosomes, double-bilayer membrane vesicles that
mediate delivery of cytosolic proteins and organelles for lyso-
somal degradation. the biogenesis and turnover of autopha-
gosomes in mammalian cells as well as the molecular mecha-
nisms underlying induction of autophagy and trafficking of
these vesicles are poorly understood. here we utilized differ-
ent autophagic markers to determine the involvement of
microtubules in the autophagic process. we show that auto-
phagosomes associate with microtubules and concentrate
near the microtubule-organizing center. moreover, we dem-
onstrate that autophagosomes, but not phagophores, move
along these tracks en route for degradation. disruption of
microtubules leads to a significant reduction in the number of
mature autophagosomes but does not affect their life span or
their fusion with lysosomes. we propose that microtubules
serve to deliver only mature autophagosomes for degrada-
tion, thus providing a spatial barrier between phagophores
and lysosomes.
autophagy is an evolutionarily conserved lysosomal pathway
involved in degradation of long lived proteins and cytoplasmic
organelles. this process, which is essential for normal turnover
of cellular compartments, is up-regulated in response to nutri-
ent starvation. autophagy starts with the sequestration of cyto-
plasmic constituents, including organelles such as mitochon-
dria, by a membrane sac known as the isolation membrane
(phagophore). closure of the isolation membrane results in the
formation of a double-bilayer membrane vesicle, called the
autophagosome (1). following movement and targeting to lyso-
somes, the autophagosome outer membrane fuses with the
lysosome/vacuole, releasing a single membrane vesicle (auto-
* this work was supported in part by the israel science foundation, the
united states-israel binational science foundation, and by the weizmann
institute minerva center. the costs of publication of this article were
defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. this article must there-
fore be hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 u.s.c. sec-
tion 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
□s the on-line version of this article (available at http://www.jbc.org) contains
supplemental figs. 1 and 2 and videos 1– 4.
1 both authors contributed equally to this work.
2 an incumbent of the sholimo and michla tomarin career development
chair of membrane physiology. to whom correspondence should be
addressed. tel.: 972-8-9343682; fax: 972-8-9344112; e-mail: bmzevi@wicc.
weizmann.ac.il.
phagic body) into this compartment to generate an autolyso-
some. finally, the sequestered contents and the inner mem-
brane are degraded by lysosomal hydrolases. the exact origin of
autophagosomes is yet unknown. recently, however, de novo
formation by nucleation, i.e. assembly and elongation of small
membrane structures, has been proposed (2, 3).
the molecular mechanism underlying autophagy was first
characterized in the yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae as a
model system (4, 5). these studies led to the identification of
a novel set of atg (autophagy-related) factors, some of which
are evolutionarily conserved (6–9). two ubiquitin-like con-
jugation systems, atg12 and atg8, participate in the early stages
of autophagy (5). atg12p is conjugated to atg5p by atg7p, an
ubiquitin-activating-like enzyme, and by atg10p, a ubiquitin-
conjugating enzyme. the resultant atg5/12p conjugate, in
complex with atg16, associates with the autophagic membrane
and detaches from it immediately upon completion of autopha-
gosome formation (10–12).
the other ubiquitin-like protein, atg8p, is first cleaved by
atg4p, a specific cysteine protease, thereby exposing a glycine
residue (13). atg8p is then activated by atg7p, the same ubiq-
uitin-activating enzyme that activates atg12p, and by atg3p, a
ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme specific for atg8p (13). finally,
the c-terminal glycine of atg8p is conjugated via an amide
bond to the amino group of the lipid phosphatidylethanolamine
(14). the yeast atg8p is highly homologous to several mamma-
lian proteins,
including map1-lc3 (lc3), gate-16, and
gabarap (15–17). the modification of lc3 at its c terminus,
like that of atg8p, is an essential step for the formation of auto-
phagosomes (10, 18). the mammalian atg4b protease has been
recently reported to cleave lc3, exposing its c-terminal glycine
120 (19). this form of lc3, termed lc3-i, is further modified
into a membrane-bound form, lc3-ii, by the mammalian
atg7p and atg3p (2, 20). although implicated in different intra-
cellular membrane trafficking pathways, all three mammalian
homologues of atg8p are processed by atg4p proteases and by
atg7p and atg3p conjugation machineries (19, 21, 22) to gen-
erate the membrane-bound form (19). lc3 has been shown to
be incorporated specifically into autophagic vesicles under con-
ditions that induce autophagy, thus serving as the first bona fide
marker for autophagosomes in mammalian cells (18, 23, 24).
despite significant progress in identifying the molecular
components that participate in autophagy, little is known about
intracellular routes and dynamics of autophagosomes in mam-
mals. hence, the kinetics of autophagosome formation and
november 24, 2006 • volume 281 • number 47
journal of biological chemistry 36303
microtubules in autophagy
delivery, their exact en route movement to lysosomes, and the
rate-limiting steps in this process remain unclear. the involve-
ment of microtubules in autophagy in mammalian cells is under
a considerable debate. treatment of cells with vinblastine, a
microtubule-depolymerizing drug, has been found in many
studies to increase the number of autophagosomes (25–28) and
the level of lc3-ii (18, 27). this accumulation was viewed in
some reports (25) as a failure of microtubules to facilitate
assembly and fusion of autophagosomes with the lysosomes. in
contrast to this view, in ehrlich ascites cells, vinblastine did not
prevent the entry of hydrolases to autophagosomes (26) but
rather accelerated the rate of autophagosome formation (29).
studies using other microtubule-depolymerizing agents, such
as nocodazole or colchicine, were also inconsistent with these
findings. hence, nocodazole has been reported to elevate the
number of autophagosomes and inhibit autophagy-mediated
protein degradation in normal rat kidney cells (30). likewise,
most recently it has been reported that vinblastine as well as
nocodazole inhibit fusion of autophagosomes with endosomes
(27) suggesting that intact microtubules contribute to autopha-
gosome targeting. others have shown, however, that nocoda-
zole had no effect on fusion of autophagosomes with lysosomes
(29). consistently, kabeya et al. (18) reported that nocodazole
or colchicine (but not vinblastine) does not elevate the level of
autophagosomes.
in this study, we utilized different autophagic markers to
identify phagophores, autophagosomes, and autolysosomes
under normal growth and starvation conditions. we found
that autophagosomes, unlike phagophores, associate with
and move along microtubules. our data indicate that intact
microtubules are not essential for targeting and fusion with
lysosomes. moreover, autophagosomes can be formed in the
absence of intact microtubules but to a significantly lower
extent. we propose that microtubules facilitate autophago-
some formation and serve to direct mature autophagosomes
for degradation in lysosomes.
experimental procedures
industries
(beit haemek laboratories,
antibodies and reagents—minimal essential medium
(mem␣),3 earle’s balanced salt solution (ebss), valine-free
mem␣, and fetal calf serum (fcs) were obtained from bio-
logical
israel).
nocodazole, paclitaxel (taxol), and bafilomycin a1 (baf a)
were provided by sigma. l-[u-14c]valine was obtained from
amersham biosciences. the following antibodies were used:
mouse monoclonal
anti-␣-tubulin and anti-␥-tubulin
(sigma); rabbit polyclonal anti-atg16 was a kind gift of
noboru mizushima (department of cell biology, national
institute for basic biology, okazaki, japan); mouse mono-
clonal anti-lampi
(developmental studies hybridoma
bank, university of iowa); mouse monoclonal anti-green flu-
orescence protein (gfp) (babco); rhodamine-conjugated
goat anti-mouse igg; cytm5-conjugated donkey anti-mouse
3 the abbreviations used are: mem␣, minimal essential medium ␣; ebss, earle’s
balanced salt solution; fcs, fetal calf serum; taxol, paclitaxel; baf a, bafilomycin
a1; gfp, green fluorescent protein; cho, chinese hamster ovary; pbs, phos-
phate-buffered saline.
igg; texas red-conjugated donkey anti-rabbit igg (jackson
immunoresearch); and horseradish peroxidase-coupled
goat antibody against mouse igg (bio-rad). lysotracker
red dnd-99 was obtained from molecular probes. peyfp-
atg5 was a kind gift of noboru mizushima. anti-lc3 anti-
body was produced by immunization of a rabbit with a pep-
tide corresponding to the 14 amino acids of the n terminus
of lc3 with an additional cysteine (psektfkqrrtfeqc).
dna construction—dna encoding human lc3 was
obtained by pcr from the total cdna of lncap cells with
lc3 sense primer 5⬘-caacaagcttcgatgccgtcgg-
agaagacc-3⬘ and lc3 antisense primer 5⬘-caatagat-
ctcgagcggccgcttacactgacaatttcatcccg-
3⬘. to obtain pgfp-lc3, lc3 dna was cleaved at hindiii
and xhoi sites and inserted into the hindiii and sali sites of
pegfp-c1, a gfp fusion protein expression vector (clon-
tech). the point mutation for glycine to alanine at position
120 of lc3 (lc3g120a) was created by pcr-based site-di-
rected mutagenesis using lc3 sense primer 5⬘-caggaga-
cgttcgcgatgaaattgtca-3⬘
and lc3 antisense
primer 5⬘-tgacaatttcatcgcggacgtctcctg-3⬘.
cathepsin-d-gfp was constructed by inserting human
cathepsin d into the n terminus of pegfp-n1 (clontech) at
sali and ecori sites.
cell culture and transfection—chinese hamster ovary
(cho) and hela cells were grown on mem␣ supplemented
with 10% fetal calf serum (fcs) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin
(sigma) at 37 °c in 5% co2. transfection of cells was performed
using lipofectamine reagent (invitrogen) at a concentration of
4 ␮l of lipofectamine/␮g of dna. stable clones of gfp-lc3-
transfected cells were selected in 1 mg/ml geneticin (g418). all
the data presented here was derived from at least three different
clones of each cell line.
starvation and drug treatment—to obtain starvation con-
ditions, cells were washed three times by pbs and incubated in
ebss medium at 37 °c for different time periods. to examine
the recovery of cells from starvation, cells incubated in ebss for
2 h were transferred to mem␣, 10% fcs for 40 min at 37 °c. in
cells treated with nocodazole or taxol, a pretreatment period of
30 min was applied to ascertain that the experiments are carried
out following the effect on microtubules. drugs were applied at
the following final concentrations: 5 ␮g/ml nocodazole, 100 nm
wortmannin, 100 nm baf a, or 20 ␮m taxol.
fluorescence microscopy—cho cells were plated on sterile
coverslips (13 mm diameter) and cultured under the conditions
indicated, fixed with cold methanol for 5 min at ⫺20 °c, and
permeabilized by quick washing with cold acetone. cells were
blocked by incubation with 10% fcs in pbs for 30 min at room
temperature, followed b y 1 h ofincubation with the primary
antibody. cells were then incubated with the secondary anti-
body for 30 min. for fluorescence imaging, a nikon eclipse
te300 microscope equipped with a gfp filter (hq fitc
41001) and hamamatsu digital camera c4742-95 was used. a
fluorescence filter was used to observe rhodamine (excitation
543 nm, mirror, emission 560–600 nm), cytm5 (excitation 633
nm, dichroic 630 nm, emission 660 nm), and gfp (excitation
488, dichroic 560 nm, emission 505–525 nm). confocal images
were taken by a fv500 laser-scanning confocal microscope
36304 journal of biological chemistry
volume 281 • number 47 • november 24, 2006
equipped with a plapo 60 ⫻ 1.4 na oil immersion lens and
fluoview software (olympus). movement of gfp-lc3 labeled
autophagosomes was monitored using olympus ix-70 confo-
cal microscope with uplapo 40 ⫻ 0.85 na. cells were kept at
37 °c in 20 mm tris, ph 7.4, in a micro-incubator (pdmi-2,
harvard apparatus). all images were done at a rate of 1 frame
every 10 s. each experiment was performed at least five times,
and representative images or movies of typical cells are
depicted in the different figures.
for quantitative analysis of the formation of autophago-
somes, cells expressing gfp-lc3 were incubated under normal
growth or starvation conditions in the absence or presence of
0.1 ␮m baf a. the number of autophagosomes per cell was
determined by confocal microscopy at different times. the
number of slices and their width were designed so that the
entire cell was covered and that autophagosomes do not appear
more than once. each point represents the average ⫾ s.d.
obtained from ⬃60 cells. the counting was performed manu-
ally and validated by more than one person.
electron microscopy—cells were grown on coverslips and
fixed with 0.3% glutaraldehyde, 0.3% paraformaldehyde in
cacodylate buffer (cacodylate 0.1 m, ph 7.4). the fixative was
rinsed twice with cacodylate buffer, and samples were dyed in
1% oso4, 0.3% potassium dichromate, and 0.3% potassium fer-
rocyanide for 1–2 h followed by 1.5–2 h of incubation with 2%
filtered uranyl acetate in h2o. ethanol was used for gradual
dehydration of the samples and epon for their embedding. to
dissolve the glass coverslips, the epon-embedded samples were
incubated fo r 2 h in 20%hydrofluoric acid. sections of 70–100
nm were viewed by transmission electron microscopy (tech-
nai-12; phillips, eindhoven, the netherlands).
subcellular fractionation—for cytosol and total membrane
analysis, cells were grown in 100-mm diameter dishes, washed,
and removed by a cell scraper. after resuspension in homoge-
nization buffer (10 mm tris, ph 7.4, 0.25 m sucrose, 1 mm phen-
ylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 0.5 ␮g/ml leupeptin, 2 ␮m pepstatin
a, and 2 ␮g/ml aprotinin), cells were homogenized by dounce
homogenizer on ice. unbroken cells and nuclei were removed
by low speed centrifugation (3,000 rpm, 5 min), and the super-
natant was centrifuged in tla 100.2 (60,000 rpm, 30 min) for
cytosol and total membrane fractions. fractions were precipi-
tated by 10% trichloroacetic acid and analyzed by western blot.
all immunoblots in this study are representatives of at least
three experiments. for membrane flotation in the sucrose gra-
dient, cho cells were grown in suspension to ⬃0.5 ⫻ 106
cell/ml (3 liters), collected by centrifugation at low speed (2000
rpm for 6 min), resuspended in 4 pellet volumes of homogeni-
zation buffer, and homogenized as described previously (43).
unbroken cells were removed from the cell homogenate by
centrifugation at 700 ⫻ g for 6 min. cell homogenate was
adjusted to 2 m sucrose and placed at the bottom of sw-28
tubes, followed by overlaying with layers of 1.75, 1.5, 1.25, 1, and
0.75 m sucrose. the gradients were centrifuged at 4 °c in sw-28
rotor (beckman) at 25,000 rpm overnight with slow accelera-
tion and deceleration. fractions were collected continuously
from the top of the gradient, and densities of the fractions were
calculated from the refractive indices. from each fraction,
microtubules in autophagy
100-␮l samples were precipitated by 10% trichloroacetic acid,
and pellets were analyzed by western blot.
determination of autophagosome life span—from the slope
of the graphs obtained under control (fig. 7a) conditions in the
presence of baf a, we calculated that the average time interval
between successive autophagosome formation events is ⬃3.3
min. in the absence of baf a, the average number of autopha-
gosomes per cell remains constant and is equal to 9.8. there-
fore, the autophagosome population is in a state of equilibrium
(equal rates of autophagosome formation and degradation).
thus, successive degradation events also occur every 3.3 min,
on average. the remaining information needed to calculate the
autophagosome life span is the average number (hereby labeled
x) of degradation events occurring between the formation of a
given autophagosome and its degradation. a simple calculation
shows that x is a geometric random variable whose average is
9.8 (44); that is, following the formation of a given autophago-
some, 9.8 degradation events of other autophagosomes occur
on average before our autophagosome is degraded. thus, the
average autophagosome life span under control conditions is
9.8 ⫻ 3.3 ⬇32.7 min. similarly, from the slope of the graph
obtained under starvation conditions in the presence of baf a
(fig. 7b), we infer that the average time interval between suc-
cessive autophagosome formation events is 1.22 min. there-
fore, when the autophagosome population reaches equilibrium,
the time interval between successive degradation events is also
⬃1.22 min. from the graph in fig. 7b, we deduced that under
starvation conditions equilibrium is reached after 60 min with
⬃28 autophagosomes per cell. then, as above, the average of x
is 28, and the average life span of an autophagosome is ⬃28 ⫻
1.22 ⬇34.2 min. (as summarized in table 1, these calculations
were done as well under nocodazole treatment.)
protease protection assay—autophagic vacuole fractions
were prepared by a sucrose gradient as described above. to
concentrate the membranes, fractions were diluted with reac-
tion buffer (tris 10 mm, ph 7.4, 0.25 m sucrose), centrifuged at
90,000 rpm for 30 min, and pellets were resuspended in reac-
tion buffer. for the protease protection assay, membranes were
incubated at 37 °c for 30 min in a reaction buffer containing 10
␮g/ml proteinase k (sigma) in the presence or absence of 0.4%
triton x-100. proteolysis was terminated by the addition of
phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride to a final concentration of 20 ␮m
at 4 °c for 10 min. samples were analyzed by immunoblotting
using antibody against gfp.
degradation of long lived proteins—degradation of long
lived proteins was performed according to standard protocol
(10). cho cells stably expressing gfp-lc3 were grown to
70–80% confluence in 6-well plates (35 mm). cells were then
labeled for 14 h in medium containing [14c]valine (0.5 ␮ci/ml)
and 5% fcs in valine-free mem␣. after three rinses with pbs,
cells were incubated in either valine-free mem␣or ebss con-
taining 0.1% bovine serum albumin and 10 mm cold valine.
when required, 5, 15, or 25 ␮g/ml nocodazole, 100 nm wort-
mannin, 100 nm bafilomycin a, or 10 ␮m 3-methyladenine was
added. after the 1-h incubation, the medium was replaced with
identical fresh medium, and cells were incubated for additional
4 h. the medium was precipitated in 10% trichloroacetic acid,
and trichloroacetic acid-soluble radioactivity was measured.
november 24, 2006 • volume 281 • number 47
journal of biological chemistry 36305
microtubules in autophagy
total cell radioactivity was measured after lysis with 0.1 m
naoh. [14c]valine release was calculated as a percentage of the
radioactivity in the trichloroacetic acid-soluble supernatant
relative to the total cell radioactivity.
results
lipidated gfp-lc3 is associated with microtubules under
normal growth and starvation conditions—to characterize
the dynamics and intracellular route taken by autophagosomes
in living cells, we established a cho cell line that stably
expresses gfp fused to the n terminus of lc3. the localization
of gfp-lc3 in living cells was followed by confocal microscopy
analysis. under normal growth conditions (mem␣), most gfp-
lc3 was found dispersed in the cytosol, although a significant
fraction (resembling a mixture of vesicles and microtubule-like
structures) was concentrated at the juxtanuclear region (fig.
1a). when cells were transferred to a starvation medium
(ebss) to induce autophagy, gfp-lc3-labeled autophago-
somes appeared in the cytoplasm within 30 min, peaking after
about 1 h of incubation (fig. 1a). these vesicles were also con-
centrated at the juxtanuclear region. in agreement with previ-
ous reports (10, 18), the change in cellular localization of lc3
was accompanied by the formation of lc3-ii, the membrane-
bound form of lc3 (fig. 1b). notably, the ratio of cytosol
(supernatant) to membrane-bound (pellet) endogenous lc3
was similar to that found for gfp-lc3 (fig. 1b). previous stud-
ies showed that mutation of glycine at position 120 prevents the
c-terminal cleavage and, consequentially, conjugation of lc3
to the autophagosomal membrane (19). under normal growth
conditions, gfp-lc3g120a was evenly distributed throughout
the cell, unlike the juxtanuclear localization of gfp-lc3wt (see
supplemental fig. 1), indicating that the subcellular localization
of gfp-lc3 is dependent on processing of its c-terminal
region both under normal growth and starvation conditions.
to further characterize the change observed in gfp-lc3
localization, the profile of membranes associated with gfp-
lc3 was determined in cell homogenates, separated by flota-
tion on a sucrose density gradient (fig. 1c). wild-type gfp-
lc3-i was obtained predominantly from the original loading
fraction (fig. 1c, upper left panels, lane 1), whereas only a small
proportion of gfp-lc3-i was associated with dense fractions,
containing endoplasmic reticulum membranes (fig. 1c, lanes 2
and 3). wild-type gfp-lc3 obtained from starved cells showed
a dramatic shift in its fractionation profile. a large amount of
the protein, consisting only of the lipidated form gfp-lc3-ii,
cofractionated with golgi membranes in the light sucrose frac-
tions (fig. 1c, lanes 4 and 5). consistently, the endogenous
lc3-i and lc3-ii, identified by specific anti-lc3 antibodies,
were fractionated similarly to gfp-lc3 (data not shown). the
fractionation profile of the mutant gfp-lc3g120a was similar
to that of the wild-type gfp-lc3-i and did not change upon
starvation (fig. 1c, right panels).
we next examined the involvement of microtubules in the
localization of gfp-lc3 under different growth conditions. to
this end, cells expressing gfp-lc3 were grown in the presence
(fig. 2a) or absence (fig. 2b) of amino acids, and microtubules
were visualized with anti-␣-tubulin antibodies. under amino
acid-rich conditions, gfp-lc3 was associated with the minus
figure 1. gfp-lc3-ii is associated with microtubules under normal and
starvation conditions. a, cells expressing gfp-lc3 were monitored by con-
focal microscopy under normal growth conditions (time 0 min) and at various
time points following their transfer to ebss (starvation) medium at 37 °c.
scale bars , 10␮m. b, western blot of cho cells stably expressing gfp-lc3.
cells were cultured for 2 h in 10%fcs/mem ␣(control) or ebss medium (star-
vation). cell homogenate (t ) (10% of the material used for further fraction-
ations) was fractionated into the supernatant (s) and pellet (p) and immuno-
blotted using antibodies against lc3. lc3-i represents the unlipidated form,
and lc3-ii represents the lipidated form of the protein. gfp-lc3 was overex-
pressed in these cells to about 5– 6-fold above the endogenous lc3 level. c,
for subcellular fractionation analysis, cultured cell homogenates, obtained
from wild-type gfp-lc3 (lc3wt) and gfp-lc3g120a stably transfected cells,
were floated on a sucrose density gradient as described under “experimental
procedures.” fractions were precipitated and analyzed by immunoblotting
using anti-gfp, anti-manii (for golgi), or anti-protein disulfide (pdi) (for endo-
plasmic reticulum) antibodies. lanes 1–5 show fractions of 53, 45, 37, 32, and
28% sucrose, respectively. asterisk represents a nonspecific band.
ends of microtubules, which were also immunostained by anti-
␥-tubulin antibodies (fig. 2a). to examine whether intact
microtubules are essential for this localization, cells were pre-
treated with nocodazole, a microtubule-depolymerizing agent.
within 15 min of this treatment, tubulin became scattered uni-
formly in the cytoplasm (data not shown). as shown in fig. 2a
(and fig. 2d), nocodazole induced a concomitant fragmenta-
tion of both microtubules and the juxtanuclear gfp-lc3 label-
ing, indicating that under normal growth conditions gfp-lc3
is concentrated toward the minus ends of microtubules in a
microtubule-dependent manner.
36306 journal of biological chemistry
volume 281 • number 47 • november 24, 2006
microtubules in autophagy
figure 2. autophagosomes are associated with the microtubule network. a, cho cells expressing gfp-lc3 were incubated in the presence or absence of
5 ␮g/ml nocodazole (noc), and microtubules or microtubule organizing center were immunostained by monoclonal anti-␣-tubulin or anti-␥-tubulin antibod-
ies, respectively. b, cells expressing gfp-lc3 were incubated under starvation conditions fo r 2 h in theabsence or presence of nocodazole or taxol and
subjected to immunofluorescence confocal microscopy using anti-␣-tubulin antibodies. c, cho, hela, hek-293, and cos7 cells were incubated under starva-
tion conditions for 2 h and then fixed and stained for endogenous lc3 and microtubules using anti-lc3 or anti-␣-tubulin antibodies, respectively. d, cells
expressing gfp-lc3 were starved fo r 2 h in theabsence or presence of nocodazole and immunostained for intermediate and microfilaments using anti-
vimentin and anti-actin antibodies, respectively. scale bars, 10 ␮m.
we next analyzed the localization of lc3 under amino acid
deprivation (fig. 2b). under these conditions, gfp-lc3-la-
beled autophagosomes concentrated around the microtubule
organizing center and appeared adjacent to microtubules.
when cells pretreated with nocodazole were transferred to
starvation medium (also containing this drug), the gfp-lc3-
labeled autophagosomes were distributed throughout the cyto-
plasm with no evidence for juxtanuclear localization (fig. 2b).
taxol, a drug that prevents depolymerization of spindle fiber
microtubules, shifted the localization of autophagosomes to the
november 24, 2006 • volume 281 • number 47
journal of biological chemistry 36307
microtubules in autophagy
figure 3. mature autophagosomes are microtubule-dependent dynamic organelles. movement of autophagosomes in starved cells was followed by real
time video microscopy. cells were incubated in starvation medium at 37 °c in the absence (a) or presence (b) of nocodazole (5 ␮g/ml) and frames were
recorded every 10 s. the boxed area on the left frame of a and b was enlarged, and frames (on the right) show time-lapse images of 1-min intervals during a 9-min
period. frames of upper panels (a) show time-lapse images of 10-s intervals between a 2- and 3-min period. tracking analysis represents a 10-min period of
movement of single gfp-lc3-labeled autophagosomes and lysotracker-labeled lysosomes (c ) or yfp-atg5 labeled structures and lysotracker-labeled
lysosomes (d). tracks for individual vesicles on the left panels were marked in different colors, and on the right (merge panel), lysosomes were marked red and
autophagosomes or phagophores green. scale bars, 5 ␮m.
microtubule poles (fig. 2b), further supporting the associa-
tion of these organelles with microtubules. this association
was limited not only to gfp-lc3 expressed in cho cells. by
utilizing anti-lc3 antibodies, we examined the localization
of endogenous lc3-labeled autophagosomes in cell lines
other than cho, including hela, hek-293, cos-7 (fig. 2c),
as well as pc12 and human melanoma cells (fig. 8c). in all of
these cell types, lc3 exhibited a similar microtubule-
dependent juxtanuclear localization of autophagosomes,
which was further confirmed by double labeling with anti-␥-
tubulin antibodies (data not shown). no association of lc3-
labeled autophagosomes with other cytoskeletal filaments
such as intermediate or microfilaments was observed (fig.
2d). taken together, these results demonstrate that lc3-
labeled autophagosomes are associated with the microtu-
bule network in various cell types.
autophagosomes, but not phagophores, are microtubule-
dependent dynamic organelles—given that microtubules
and associated molecular motors are responsible for intra-
cellular movement of organelles and vesicles, we tested
whether autophagosomes also move along these tracks. we
followed autophagosome dynamics in cells expressing gfp-
lc3 by time-lapse video microscopy at 10-s intervals for a
10-min period (fig. 3). autophagosomes appeared as highly
dynamic organelles exhibiting rapid movements. analysis of
a typical autophagosome revealed long distance, rapid direc-
tional movements of about 3 ␮m/10-s period, followed by
short, random movements or pauses (fig. 3a, arrowhead; for
movie see supplemental video 1). the rapid, long distance
directional movements were observed in both centrifugal
and centripetal directions between the cell equator and the
periphery,
suggesting progression along microtubules.
indeed, application of nocodazole invariably abolished this
type of movement (fig. 3b) indicating that autophagosome
movement is microtubule-dependent. further analysis of
this movement revealed that autophagosomes tend to move
along distinct tracks similar to lysotracker-labeled lyso-
somes (fig. 3c and supplemental video 2). the rapid move-
ments of both lysosomes and autophagosomes were totally
abolished by nocodazole (for a movie see supplemental video
3), taxol, and by reducing temperature to 16 °c (data not
shown).
36308 journal of biological chemistry
volume 281 • number 47 • november 24, 2006
microtubules in autophagy
anti-lc3 antibodies, indicating that
these dots represent bona fide phago-
phores (data not shown). as shown in
the time-lapse tracking analysis ob-
tained from a 10-min period, yfp-
atg5-labeled structures were immo-
bile, unlike the lysotracker-labeled
lysosomes (fig. 3d and supplemen-
tal video 4). we conclude that ma-
ture autophagosomes move along
microtubules, whereas phagophores
remain immobile.
autolysosomes are formed in
the presence or absence of intact
microtubules—among its other
functions, the microtubule net-
work is being utilized for organiz-
ing vesicular transport. to deter-
mine whether microtubules are
required for targeting and fusion of
autophagosomes with lysosomes,
we first set up conditions for detect-
ing the product of this transport
step, namely autolysosomes. as
these organelles are short lived and
are rarely detected, inhibition of the
lysosomal catabolic activity is essen-
tial to stabilize and visualize them.
accordingly, the dynamics of auto-
phagosome formation and degrada-
tion were characterized by starving
cells in the presence or absence of
the vacuolar h⫹-atpase inhibitor
bafilomycin a (baf a). inhibition of
lysosomal acidification by baf a (31)
or chloroquine (32) is known to
block activity of the ph-dependent
lysosomal proteases and is thus
expected to bring about accumula-
tion of autolysosomes. it has been
reported that baf a inhibits autoph-
agy, with production of autolyso-
somes (31). however, other reports
have suggested that baf a inhibits
fusion between autophagosomes
i.e.
and lysosomes,
formation of
autolysosomes
(33). to directly
address this issue, we labeled lyso-
somes of
the stably transfected
gfp-lc3 starved cells with anti-lampi antibodies. as
depicted in fig. 4a, only a small fraction of lysosomes and auto-
phagosomes colocalized in the absence of baf a. however, in
the presence of baf a most lc3-labeled membranes were found
within lysosomes (fig. 4a; see also fig. 5b), whereas no colocal-
ization was detected with the early endosome marker eea1.
under these conditions,
the lampi-labeled membranes
appeared enlarged and in many cases contained more than one
autophagic body. quantification of these enlarged lysosomes
figure 4. formation of autolysosomes is stabilized under baf a treatment. a, cells expressing gfp-lc3
were incubated under starvation conditions in the absence or presence of 0.1 ␮m baf a for 2 h. lysosomes or
early endosomes were labeled with monoclonal antibodies against lampi or eea1, respectively, and colocal-
ization was analyzed by confocal microscopy. arrows depict autolysosomes (gfp-lc3-labeled membranes
within lysosomes). scale bar, 10 ␮m. b, sequential confocal sections (slices of 0.25 ␮m) of autolysosomes. c,
protease protection assay. gfp-lc3 expressing cells were starved in the absence (lanes 1–3) or presence of baf
a (lanes 4 – 6). autophagosomes fractions (for details see “experimental procedures”) obtained from these cells
were incubated at 37 °c for 30 min in the absence (lanes 1 and 4) or presence (lanes 2, 3, 5, and 6) of proteinase
k (pr. k). in lanes 5 and 6, 0.4% triton x-100 (tx100) was added. samples were subjected to immunoblotting with
antibodies against lc3. d, cho cells were incubated under starvation conditions in the absence or presence of
0.1 ␮m baf a for 2 h, fixed, and analyzed using electron microscopy. arrows show the empty lysosomes, and the
arrowheads show the accumulation of autophagic bodies within autolysosomes in baf a treatment. scale bar,
0.5 ␮m.
previous studies demonstrated that both atg5 and lc3 are as-
sociated with the phagophore membrane (also known as the iso-
lation membrane) at the site of autophagosome formation, but
only lc3 remains associated with mature autophagosomes (10).
to determine whether phagophores also move along microtu-
bules, yfp-atg5 was stably expressed in cho cells and followed
by time-lapse video microscopy. we confirmed that in this exper-
imental system, yfp-atg5-labeled vesicles were detected only af-
ter amino acid deprivation and were colabeled with anti-atg16 or
november 24, 2006 • volume 281 • number 47
journal of biological chemistry 36309
microtubules in autophagy
figure 5. the level of lc3/atg5/atg16-labeled structures under starvation following baf a treatment. cho cells were incubated for 2 h under starvation
conditions in the absence or presence of 0.1 ␮m baf a. cells stably expressing either gfp-lc3 (a) or yfp-atg5 (b) were stained by polyclonal antibodies against
atg16 (a) or lc3 and lampi (b), respectively. scale bar, 10 ␮m.
showed an average increase of ⬃30% in diameter (⬃1.2 ␮m)
compared with normal conditions (⬃0.9 ␮m). a sequential
z-section (0.2 ␮m) analysis was performed to ensure that gfp-
lc3 was indeed localized within lysosomes (fig. 4b).
our results suggest that baf a blocks lysosomal degradation
without affecting autophagosome-lysosome fusion. to verify
the topology of lc3-ii biochemically, we performed a protease
protection assay of membranes purified from control and baf
a-treated cells. although lc3-ii from cells grown in the
absence of baf a was mostly degraded by proteinase k (fig. 4c,
lane 2), lc3-ii from baf a-treated cells was protected from
proteolysis (fig. 4c, lane 5), indicating that baf a treatment
leads to the accumulation of lc3-ii within enclosed mem-
branes. consistently, transmission electron microscopy analy-
sis demonstrated that treatment with baf a resulted in swollen
lysosomes containing a large number of nondegraded autoph-
agic bodies (fig. 4d).
inhibition of lysosomal proteolysis by baf a did not affect
early steps of autophagosome formation, because the level of
phagophores labeled by atg5/atg16 under starvation condi-
tions did not change in the presence of baf a, although that of
vesicles labeled by gfp-lc3 or endogenous lc3 was signifi-
cantly elevated (fig. 5, a and b). note that although vesicles
labeled with lc3 alone accumulated within lysosomes under
baf a treatment, phagophores labeled by lc3 and yfp-atg5
were excluded from lysosomes (fig. 5b). taken together, our
findings show that baf a treatment does not inhibit the fusion
of autophagosomes with lysosomes but rather inhibits lysoso-
mal degradation, thus leading to the accumulation of autoph-
agic bodies within lysosomes.
to examine whether microtubules are essential for delivery
and fusion of autophagosomes with lysosomes, cho cells
expressing gfp-lc3 were pretreated with nocodazole and then
starved in the presence or absence of baf a. as in the case of
intact microtubules, baf a treatment resulted in a dramatic
accumulation of lc3-labeled vesicles, found mostly within
lamp1-labeled lysosomes (fig. 6a). furthermore, transmis-
sion electron microscopy analysis of these cells clearly demon-
strated the accumulation of autophagic bodies within lyso-
somes (fig. 6b). these findings demonstrate that intact
microtubules are not required for autophagosome-lysosome
fusion. recently, kochl et al. (27) have reported that nocoda-
zole treatment of primary hepatocytes reduced the extent of
colocalization between lysosomes (lysotracker) and autopha-
gosomes (gfp-lc3), suggesting a role of microtubules in their
fusion process. to further examine whether microtubule disas-
sembly affects fusion between lysosomes and autophagosomes,
we quantified the number of gfp-lc3-labeled vesicles interior
and exterior to lysosomes in cells treated with baf a in the
absence or presence of nocodazole. as depicted in fig. 6c, the
percentage of gfp-lc3 labeled vesicles within lysosomes
(autophagic bodies) was not altered by nocodazole treatment,
36310 journal of biological chemistry
volume 281 • number 47 • november 24, 2006
microtubules in autophagy
next, by using the data presented
above(fig.7,aandb),wedetermined
whether microtubule depolymeriza-
tionaffectsthelifespanofautophago-
somes.asautophagosomesarehighly
dynamic organelles, determination of
their kinetic parameters by direct
video microscopy may turn mislead-
ing. in addition, the often occurring
collisions between individual auto-
phagosomes, as well as between
autophagosomes and lysosomes (see
supplemental video 4 and supple-
mental fig. 2), bring another factor of
uncertainty to their tracking. more-
over,inmanycasesthedisappearance
and appearance of these vesicles may
be accounted for by their vertical
movement in and out of the focus
plane. to overcome these difficulties,
we utilized a mathematical approach
to calculate autophagosome life span
usingfixedcells.twoparameters(de-
duced from the graphs in fig. 7, a and
b, and summarized in table 1) are re-
quired to calculate the autophago-
some average life span as follows: the
average number of autophagosomes
per cell at steady state and the rate of
their formation. simply multiplying
these two parameters gives the aver-
age life span of the autophagosomes (see elaborated explanation
under “experimental procedures”). as summarized in table 1, the
life span of an autophagosome resides between 30 and 35 min and
was not affected by microtubule disruption. consistent with our
calculation, direct monitoring of single autophagosomes, carried
out at areas where distinct autophagosomes and lysosomes could
be detected, showed that the time duration between appearance
and disappearance of a given gfp-lc3-labeled vesicle was indeed
30–40 min (fig. 7c). notably, the disappearance of lc3-labeled
autophagosomes was associated with colocalization with lyso-
somes labeled with lysotracker (fig. 7c). in summary, we show
that microtubule depolymerization affects the rate of autophago-
some formation but not their life span. hence, the data presented
here further indicate that intact microtubules are not essential for
the fusion event, implying that targeting of autophagosomes to
lysosomes may not be the rate-limiting step in this pathway.
an alternative approach to study the dynamics of the auto-
phagic process is by determining the rate of autophagosome
disappearance under conditions where amino acids are added
to the growing medium. to this end, cells expressing gfp-lc3
were starved fo r 2 h toinduce autophagosome formation and
then allowed to recover in amino acid-rich medium (mem␣)
for different times. as shown in fig. 8a, most autophagosomes
disappeared within 30–45 min. these values further support
the life span calculations presented above. as depicted in fig.
8b, microtubule disassembly by nocodazole had no effect on
figure 6. intact microtubules are not essential for fusion of autophagosomes with lysosomes. a, cho
cells expressing gfp-lc3 were starved fo r 2 h in thepresence of nocodazole or nocodazole and baf a. lyso-
somes were labeled with monoclonal antibodies against lampi, and colocalization of autophagosomes and
lysosomes was analyzed by confocal microscopy. white boxes are enlarged to show the level of colocalization.
scale bar , 5␮m. b, cells were incubated for 2 h under starvation conditions in the presence of 0.1 ␮m baf a and
5 ␮g/ml nocodazole, fixed, and analyzed using electron microscopy. scale bar, 0.5 ␮m. c, baf a-treated cells
were starved for 2 h in theabsence or presence of nocodazole, and lysosomes were stained with lampi
antibodies. the number of gfp-lc3-labeled autophagic bodies and autophagosomes per cell was determined
by confocal microscopy and represents the average ⫾ s.d.
indicating that in our system microtubule depolymerization
does not affect the rate of autolysosome formation.
microtubule disassembly affects autophagosomes forma-
tion but not their life span—as shown above, targeting and
fusion of autophagosomes with lysosomes can take place in the
absence of intact microtubules. in other trafficking pathways,
such as delivery of vesicles to the plasma membrane, microtu-
bules were suggested to act as traffic facilitators. therefore, we
quantified the level and kinetics of autophagy in the presence or
absence of microtubule poisons. the average number of gfp-
lc3-labeled vesicles per cell was determined under different
growth conditions. as the number of autophagosomes per cell
is determined by the rate of their formation versus degradation,
blocking lysosomal degradation by baf a, thereby inhibiting
autophagosome degradation without affecting their formation
(see fig. 5), reveals the overall rate of autophagosome forma-
tion. as depicted in fig. 7a (and table 1), under control condi-
tions the number of gfp-lc3-labeled vesicles at steady state is
⬃10 autophagosomes per cell, and their formation rate is 0.3
autophagosomes per min. under starvation conditions (fig.
7b), the number of vesicles increased gradually, reaching a
steady state level of about 30 vesicles per cell with formation
rate of ⬃0.8 autophagosomes per min. nocodazole treatment
showed a significant decrease (⬃25%) of autophagosome for-
mation rate (fig. 7, a and b, table 1, and fig. 6c), leading to an
overall reduced number of autophagosomes (also ⬃25%) at
steady state.
november 24, 2006 • volume 281 • number 47
journal of biological chemistry 36311
microtubules in autophagy
figure 7. determining the rate of autophagosome formation and degradation under different conditions. cells expressing gfp-lc3 were incubated
under control (a) or starvation (b) conditions in the absence or presence of 0.1 ␮m baf a. the number of autophagosomes per cell was determined by confocal
microscopy at different times. each point represents the average ⫾ s.d. obtained from ⬃60 cells. c, video microscopy monitoring directly the life span of a
gfp-lc3-labeled autophagosome in cells incubated in starvation medium at 37 °c with lysosomes/late endosomes labeled by lysotracker (lt ).
table 1
rate of formation and average life span of autophagosomes under
different growth conditions
the abbreviations used are as follows: aut, autophagosomes; con, control; st, star-
vation; noc, nocodazole.
aut/cell at
steady state
9.8 ⫾ 3.2
8.1 ⫾ 3.3
28.5 ⫾ 3.5a
21.6 ⫾ 5.8a
treatment
con
con ⫹ noc
st
st ⫹ noc
ap ⬍ 0.005.
formation rate
life span
aut/min
0.30
0.26
0.82
0.66
min
32.3
31.6
34.8
32.8
the ability of cells to degrade existing autophagosomes follow-
ing transfer to mem␣.
alternatively, we have tested the ability of pre-existing auto-
phagosomes to be delivered for lysosomal degradation by uti-
lizing the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase inhibitor wortmannin,
known to inhibit formation of new autophagosomes (34–36).
hence, treatment of starved cells with this drug again resulted
in an overall reduction in the autophagosome level, in a similar
time frame, regardless of nocodazole treatment (fig. 8b). in all
treatments, the level of gfp-lc3-ii in the membrane fraction
(pellet) was correlated with the appearance of autophagosomes
(fig. 8b, western blot at the bottom of each panel). this phe-
nomenon was observed in various cell lines (fig. 8c). taken
together, these results indicate that microtubule disruption
reduces autophagosome formation without affecting the nor-
mal duration of autophagy.
microtubule disruption delays the transport of proteolytic
enzymes to lysosomes—our results indicate that microtubule
depolymerization inhibits autophagosome formation by up to
25%. previous reports indicated that microtubule disassembly
induced by toxins such as nocodazole and vinblastine dramat-
ically inhibits autophagy-mediated protein degradation (27,
30). to further characterize the role of microtubules in our
system, we tested the effect of nocodazole on autophagy-medi-
ated protein degradation. to this end, cho cells were pre-
labeled with [14c]valine for 16 h, and protein degradation was
monitored after cells were transferred to starvation medium for
4 h. as depicted in fig. 9a, this treatment resulted in about 50%
increase in protein degradation activity, which, in turn, was
inhibited in the presence of wortmannin, 3-methyladenine, or
baf a. applying nocodazole at concentrations sufficient to
depolymerize microtubule network and immobilize autopha-
gosomes and lysosomes (5 ␮g/ml) reduced protein degradation
36312 journal of biological chemistry
volume 281 • number 47 • november 24, 2006
microtubules in autophagy
figure 8. recovery from starvation does not require intact microtubule network. a, cho cells expressing gfp-lc3 were starved for 2 h (time 0) and
allowed to recover in amino acid-rich medium (mem␣) for different times. b, cells were incubated fo r 2 h in theabsence or presence of nocodazole in mem␣
(control) and ebss medium (starvation). next, starved cells were transferred to mem␣for 40 min recovery in the absence or presence of nocodazole. alterna-
tively, starved cells were further incubated in ebss medium for 40 min in the presence of wortmannin (wort) (0.1 ␮m). for immunoblotting analysis, cells were
homogenized as described under “experimental procedures,” and soluble and membrane-associated gfp-lc3 was detected by anti-gfp antibodies. s, super-
natant; p, pellet. scale bar, 10 ␮m. c, hela, hek-293, cos-7, cho, pc12, and human melanoma (mel) cells were incubated for 2 h in theabsence or presence of
nocodazole. cells starved in the presence of nocodazole were transferred to mem␣for a 40-min recovery in the presence of nocodazole as well. cells were
stained for endogenous lc3 using anti-lc3 antibodies.
by 20–25% (fig. 9a). when higher concentrations of nocoda-
zole were used (15 and 25 ␮g/ml), degradation was inhibited in
a dose-dependent manner, corroborating previous reports (27,
30) (fig. 9a). based on these results, we propose that the direct
effect of microtubule disruption is on autophagosome forma-
tion; the observed inhibition in protein degradation at high
drug concentrations is not directly related to the targeting and
fusion processes. in fact, when starved cells were treated with
nocodazole for extended times (7 h), lc3 accumulated within
lysosomes, suggesting that lysosomal activity is inhibited under
these conditions (fig. 9b). also, under these conditions the
lysosomal protease cathepsin d-gfp was excluded from the
lysosomes (fig. 9c), indicating that the delivery of lysosomal
factors into the lysosome was defected under these conditions.
discussion
autophagy represents a unique intracellular trafficking path-
way whereby external signals, such as amino acid deprivation,
lead to the production of new organelles, termed autophago-
somes that are delivered for degradation in lysosomes/vacuoles.
the whole process may be divided into several defined stages as
follows: formation of phagophores, formation of mature auto-
november 24, 2006 • volume 281 • number 47
journal of biological chemistry 36313
microtubules in autophagy
figure 9. long periods of microtubule disruption inhibit the lysosomal proteolytic activity. a, following the procedures described under “experimental
procedures,” the rate of degradation of long lived proteins was measured in cho cells incubated in either mem␣or ebss medium in the absence or presence
of 3-methyladenine (3-ma) (10 ␮m), wortmannin (0.1 ␮m), nocodazole (5, 15, and 25 ␮g/ml), or baf a (0.1 ␮m). values express the percentage of cellular proteins
degraded in 4 h represented as the means ⫾ s.d. of nine determinations. b, cho cells were starved fo r 7 h in thepresence of 5 ␮g/ml nocodazole. autopha-
gosomes and lysosomes were labeled using antibodies against lc3 (blue) or lampi (red), respectively. c, cho cells expressing cathepsin d-gfp (cd-gfp) were
incubated under starvation conditions in the presence of 0.1 ␮m baf a and in the absence or presence of 5 ␮g/ml nocodazole. lysosomes and autophagosomes
were labeled using antibodies against lampi (red) or lc3 (blue), respectively, and colocalization was analyzed by confocal microscopy. areas in the white boxes
are enlarged on the left corner.
phagosomes, targeting and trafficking of autophagosomes to
lysosomes, formation of autolysosomes by fusion between
autophagosomes and lysosomes, and, finally degradation of the
autophagic bodies within the lysosomes. in this study we com-
bined multiple experimental approaches to determine the
involvement of the microtubule network in each step along the
autophagic pathway. we show that only mature autophago-
somes are associated and move along microtubules en route to
lysosomes. our results indicate that in the absence of intact
microtubules autophagosomes are formed but at a significantly
lower rate. however, targeting and fusion of autophagosomes
with lysosomes are not affected by microtubule disassembly.
based on these findings we propose that microtubules facilitate
autophagosome formation and may act as a barrier between
phagophores and autophagosomes.
in most trafficking systems, microtubules facilitate the deliv-
ery of vesicles to their final long distance targets (37). here we
show that autophagosomes utilize microtubule tracks on their
way to lysosomes. however, disruption of microtubules does
not affect the kinetics of the trafficking step. the data presented
are consistent with the hypothesis that targeting of autophago-
somes to lysosomes may not be the rate-limiting step in this
pathway. in our real time video experiments, we noticed that
moving autophagosomes and lysosomes often associate with
each other; however, in most cases, they dissociate without
fusion (see supplemental fig. 2 and supplemental video 2).
moreover, we found that when autophagy is induced in the
absence of intact microtubules, autophagosomes are found at
the vicinity of lysosomes (see fig. 6a and supplemental video 3),
thus reducing the need for large distance movements. if target-
ing of autophagosomes to lysosomes was a rate-limiting step,
the overall life span of autophagosomes would be reduced
under these conditions. we detected, however, no difference in
the average autophagosome life span in the presence or absence
of intact microtubules, indicating that the rate-limiting step(s)
is downstream of the targeting process, namely tethering
and/or fusion with the lysosomal membrane. we have recently
found that the n-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor atpase
activity, the major intracellular fusion factor that participates in
the fusion between autophagosomes and lysosomes (38), is
attenuated when autophagy is induced (39), thus providing a
possible explanation for the slow autophagosome-lysosome
membrane fusion.
treatment of cells with baf a results in the accumulation of
autophagic vesicles and inhibition of autophagy-mediated pro-
tein degradation. two previous reports disagree on the issue as
to which step in the autophagic process is inhibited by this
treatment. based mainly on electron microscopy analysis,
yamamoto et al. (33) suggest that baf a inhibits the fusion
between the autophagosomes and lysosomes. however, by
combining electron microscopy and biochemical analysis,
mousavi et al. (31) concluded that baf a had no inhibitory effect
on fusion but rather on intra-lysosomal degradation. here we
examined this question by utilizing biochemical, morphologi-
cal, and immunohistological approaches, all of which indicate
that baf a has no effect on fusion of autophagosomes with lyso-
somes but, rather, it inhibits degradation within the lysosome.
we argue that by blocking the vacuolar h⫹-atpase localized
on lysosomes, baf a inhibits lysosomal acidification leading to
the accumulation of autophagic bodies within lysosomes. this
36314 journal of biological chemistry
volume 281 • number 47 • november 24, 2006
treatment allows the detection of gfp-lc3 within autolyso-
somes, thus providing a suitable experimental tool to study
fusion between autophagosomes and lysosomes in living cells.
among their other functions, microtubules serve as road-
ways for membrane traffic. similar to other intracellular traf-
ficking processes, the involvement of microtubules in fusion
between autophagosomes and lysosomes is under considerable
debate. in this study, we could directly link microtubule-de-
pendent movement with autophagic activity. we showed that
mature autophagosomes are associated with microtubules and
move along these tracks, yet intact microtubules are not essen-
tial for autophagosome targeting and fusion with lysosomes.
previous reports linked microtubules to autophagy. for exam-
ple, the microtubule toxin vinblastine is commonly used to
accumulate autophagosomes in rat hepatocytes (28). however,
kochl et al. (27) have recently shown that this accumulation
reflects increased autophagosome formation and occurs prior
to microtubule depolymerization by vinblastine, indicating that
the observed effect is not necessarily related to the microtubule
state of polymerization/depolymerization. in accord with our
findings, that report has also shown that intact microtubules
facilitate autophagosome formation. however, the authors link
microtubule depolymerization with inhibition of autophago-
some-endosome fusion (27, 30). the different response to
microtubule disassembly reported by kochl et al. (27) may be
explained by the different cell system or the higher nocodazole
concentrations used by these authors. consistent with these
reports, when high concentrations of nocodazole were applied
here as in those studies, bulk protein degradation was blocked.
we have shown, however, that treatment with low nocodazole
concentration, which was sufficient to completely abolish
movement of autophagosomes, did not affect targeting and
fusion with lysosomes nor did it block bulk protein degradation.
therefore, we suggest that inhibiting autophagy with high con-
centrations of nocodazole may result from indirect effects on
lysosome function.
functional loss of dynein, a minus end-directed microtubule
motor protein, and microtubule disruption by nocodazole (0.1
ng/ml) have been recently linked to impairment in autophagic
clearance of aggregate-prone proteins. these studies suggest
that dynein mutations and microtubule disruption impair tar-
geting of autophagosomes to lysosomes via microtubules (40,
41). however, these studies applied long periods (at least 48 h)
of nocodazole treatment or dynein inactivation. such condi-
tions inhibited to some degree the basal level of autophagosome
targeting and may indicate that microtubules indeed have a
marginal effect on autophagosomes targeting to lysosomes,
which in our studies could not be detected. the long periods of
microtubule-dependent transport inhibition may have an indi-
rect effect on autophagy. we show here that long periods of
nocodazole treatment impair degradation of lc3 within lyso-
somes, possibly by inhibition of the delivery of lysosomal
hydrolases as reported previously (42).
the role of microtubules in autophagy is still an open issue.
for a mature autophagosome to reach and engage with a distant
lysosome, movement is certainly required. a directional deliv-
ery along microtubules is the most conceivable route to achieve
this engagement. yet, our results suggest that microtubule-de-
microtubules in autophagy
pendent movement is dispensable for autophagy. this may
arise from the fact that upon microtubule depolymerization the
tight association that exists between lysosomes and microtu-
bules is disrupted, and lysosomes become distributed through-
out the cytoplasm. in such a case, and considering the large
number of lysosomes, diffusion may be sufficient to allow their
engagement with autophagosomes. in the presence of intact
microtubules (the normal physiological state), however, lyso-
somes are concentrated at the microtubule organizing center;
therefore, autophagosomes require microtubules for successful
targeting. thus, the existence of autophagosomes and lyso-
somes on the same tracks (microtubules) allows fusion to occur.
we found that atg5-labeled phagophores, in contrast to
autophagosomes, are immobile organelles. this static nature of
phagophores may represent an extra spatial barrier between
phagophores and lysosomes that prevents undesirable fusion
between these two organelles. thus it is possible that microtu-
bules play a role in preventing this type of fusion allowing only
autophagosomes and lysosomes to move along it but not
phagophores. this may explain the reduction in autophago-
some formation observed in the absence of intact microtubules.
finally, our results indicate that the only detectable effect of
microtubule disassembly is an ⬃25% reduction in autophago-
some formation. therefore, we suggest that microtubules facil-
itate early stages of autophagosome biogenesis. what can be
the involvement of microtubules in this stage? two synchro-
nous ubiquitin-like systems take part in early stages of autopha-
gosome formation. the first is composed of the atg12-atg5
conjugate, which together with atg16 is localized on the phago-
phore membrane, allowing the conjugation of lc3 to phos-
phatidylethanolamine on this membrane. lc3 remains on the
mature autophagosomes, whereas atg12-atg5 and atg16 are
excluded (12). indeed, lc3 was originally identified as a micro-
tubule-associated factor (15). consistently, we detected in this
study a significant association of this molecule with intact
microtubules. it is therefore likely that microtubules facilitate
the incorporation of lc3 to the autophagic membrane, leading
to increased production of autophagosomes under starvation
conditions. alternatively, microtubules may act downstream to
the biogenesis step by facilitating the removal of mature auto-
phagosomes from the production sites. additional experiments
should be addressed to resolve these issues.
acknowledgments—we thank m. fainzilber, j. lowengrub, y. avivi,
and y. barash for discussions and critical evaluation of the manu-
script and v. kiss for technical assistance.
references
1. seglen, p. o., and bohley, p. (1992) experientia (basel) 48, 158–172
2. tanida, i., tanida-miyake, e., komatsu, m., ueno, t., and kominami, e.
(2002) j. biol. chem. 277, 13739–13744
3. noda, t., suzuki, k., and ohsumi, y. (2002) trends cell biol. 12, 231–235
4. levine, b., and klionsky, d. j. (2004) dev. cell 6, 463–477
5. ohsumi, y. (2001) nat. rev. mol. cell biol. 2, 211–216
6. klionsky, d. j., cregg, j. m., dunn, w. a., jr., emr, s. d., sakai, y., sandoval,
i. v., sibirny, a., subramani, s., thumm, m., veenhuis, m., and ohsumi,
y. (2003) dev. cell 5, 539–545
7. tsukada, m., and ohsumi, y. (1993) febs lett. 333, 169–174
8. thumm, m., egner, r., koch, b., schlumpberger, m., straub, m., veen-
november 24, 2006 • volume 281 • number 47
journal of biological chemistry 36315
25. fengsrud, m., roos, n., berg, t., liou, w., slot, j. w., and seglen, p. o.
(1995) exp. cell res. 221, 504–519
26. punnonen, e. l., and reunanen, h. (1990) exp. mol. pathol. 52, 87–97
27. kochl, r., hu, x. w., chan, e. y., and tooze, s. a. (2006) traffic 7,
129–145
48, 97–102
28. seglen, p. o., berg, t. o., blankson, h., fengsrud, m., holen, i., and
stromhaug, p. e. (1996) adv. exp. med. biol. 389, 103–111
29. reunanen, h., marttinen, m., and hirsimaki, p. (1988) exp. mol. pathol.
30. aplin, a., jasionowski, t., tuttle, d. l., lenk, s. e., and dunn, w. a., jr.
(1992) j. cell physiol. 152, 458–466
31. mousavi, s. a., kjeken, r., berg, t. o., seglen, p. o., berg, t., and brech, a.
(2001) biochim. biophys. acta 1510, 243–257
32. kovacs, a. l., and seglen, p. o. (1982) acta biol. med. ger. 41, 125–130
33. yamamoto, a., tagawa, y., yoshimori, t., moriyama, y., masaki, r., and
tashiro, y. (1998) cell struct. funct. 23, 33–42
34. blommaart, e. f., krause, u., schellens, j. p., vreeling-sindelarova, h., and
meijer, a. j. (1997) eur. j. biochem. 243, 240–246
35. kihara, a., kabeya, y., ohsumi, y., and yoshimori, t. (2001) embo rep.
36. seglen, p. o., and gordon, p. b. (1982) proc. natl. acad. sci. u. s. a. 79,
2, 330–335
1889–1892
microtubules in autophagy
huis, m., and wolf, d. h. (1994) febs lett. 349, 275–280
9. harding, t. m., morano, k. a., scott, s. v., and klionsky, d. j. (1995) j. cell
biol. 131, 591–602
10. mizushima, n., yamamoto, a., hatano, m., kobayashi, y., kabeya, y.,
suzuki, k., tokuhisa, t., ohsumi, y., and yoshimori, t. (2001) j. cell biol.
152, 657–668
11. kuma, a., hatano, m., matsui, m., yamamoto, a., nakaya, h., yoshimori,
t., ohsumi, y., tokuhisa, t., and mizushima, n. (2004) nature 432,
1032–1036
12. mizushima, n., kuma, a., kobayashi, y., yamamoto, a., matsubae, m.,
takao, t., natsume, t., ohsumi, y., and yoshimori, t. (2003) j. cell sci.
116, 1679–1688
13. kirisako, t., ichimura, y., okada, h., kabeya, y., mizushima, n., yoshi-
mori, t., ohsumi, m., takao, t., noda, t., and ohsumi, y. (2000) j. cell
biol. 151, 263–276
14. ichimura, y., kirisako, t., takao, t., satomi, y., shimonishi, y., ishihara,
n., mizushima, n., tanida, i., kominami, e., ohsumi, m., noda, t., and
ohsumi, y. (2000) nature 408, 488–492
j. a.
15. mann, s. s., and hammarback,
(1994) j. biol. chem. 269,
16. wang, h., bedford, f. k., brandon, n. j., moss, s. j., and olsen, r. w.
17. sagiv, y., legesse-miller, a., porat, a., and elazar, z. (2000) embo j. 19,
11492–11497
(1999) nature 397, 69–72
1494–1504
18. kabeya, y., mizushima, n., ueno, t., yamamoto, a., kirisako, t., noda,
t., kominami, e., ohsumi, y., and yoshimori, t. (2000) embo j. 19,
5720–5728
19. kabeya, y., mizushima, n., yamamoto, a., oshitani-okamoto, s., oh-
sumi, y., and yoshimori, t. (2004) j. cell sci. 117, 2805–2812
20. tanida, i., tanida-miyake, e., ueno, t., and kominami, e. (2001) j. biol.
chem. 276, 1701–1706
21. tanida, i., komatsu, m., ueno, t., and kominami, e. (2003) biochem.
biophys. res. commun. 300, 637–644
22. scherz-shouval, r., sagiv, y., shorer, h., and elazar, z. (2003) j. biol.
chem. 278, 14053–14058
23. mizushima, n., yamamoto, a., matsui, m., yoshimori, t., and ohsumi, y.
(2004) mol. biol. cell 15, 1101–1111
24. bampton, e. t., goemans, c., niranjan, d., mizushima, n., and tolk-
ovsky, a. m. (2005) autophagy 1, 23–36
37. musch, a. (2004) traffic 5, 1–9
38. ishihara, n., hamasaki, m., yokota, s., suzuki, k., kamada, y., kihara, a.,
yoshimori, t., noda, t., and ohsumi, y. (2001) mol. biol. cell 12,
3690–3702
39. shorer, h., amar, n., meerson, a., and elazar, z. (2005) j. biol. chem. 280,
16219–16226
40. ravikumar, b., acevedo-arozena, a., imarisio, s., berger, z., vacher, c.,
o’kane, c. j., brown, s. d., and rubinsztein, d. c. (2005) nat. genet. 37,
771–776
41. webb, j. l., ravikumar, b., and rubinsztein, d. c. (2004) int. j. biochem.
cell biol. 36, 2541–2550
j. cell sci. 96, 711–720
42. scheel, j., matteoni, r., ludwig, t., hoflack, b., and kreis, t. e. (1990)
43. porat, a., and elazar, z. (2000) j. biol. chem. 275, 29233–29237
44. hamming, r. w. (1991) the art of probability for scientist and engineers,
pp. 145–146, addison-wesley, redwood city, ca
36316 journal of biological chemistry
volume 281 • number 47 • november 24, 2006